[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Section: Urban Problematic II                
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                            2014,Vol.31(7/8)137–161
        Lively Infrastructure                                
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2014
                                             Reprintsandpermissions:
                                        sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
        Ash Amin                         DOI:10.1177/0263276414548490
        CambridgeUniversity                     tcs.sagepub.com
        Abstract                                             
        Thispaperexaminesthesociallifeandsocialityofurbaninfrastructure.Drawingona
        casestudyoflandoccupationsandinformalsettlementsinthecityofBeloHorizonte
        inBrazil,wherethestaplesoflifesuchaswater,electricity,shelterandsanitationare
        co-constructedbythepoor,thepaperarguesthatinfrastructures–visibleandinvis-
        ible – are deeply implicated in not only the making and unmaking of individual lives,
        but also in the experience of community, solidarity and struggle for recognition.
        Infrastructure is proposed as a gathering force and political intermediary of consid-
        erable significance in shaping the rights of the poor to the city and theircapacity to
        claim those rights.                                  
        Keywords                                             
        favelas, infrastructure, occupations, rights to the city, sociality, solidarity
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
                                                             
        We are seeing the rise of a new genre of thinking that narrates the social
        lifeofacitythroughitsmaterialinfrastructure.Init,trunknetworks,the
        built environment, and public utilities and services appear not only as
        subjects of interest in their own right, but also as matters implicated in
        the making of urban functionality, sociality and identity. Of course, dis-
        ciplines such as architecture, urban design and engineering, and systems
        science have long thought of cities in these terms, displaying varying
        degrees of interest in the nature of the relationship between the material
        and the social. Sometimes the infrastructures have been seen as provi-
        sioning systems, sometimes as emblems of futurity, sometimes as designs
        of social being, occasioning diverse kinds of positive or negative com-
        mentary from social scientists on how the human is imagined as adjunct
        to the material (see, for example, Mumford, 1938; Park, 1952; Sennett,
        1994 on the modern American metropolis).             
         The new social science writing, in contrast, tends to see the material
        and cultural as hyphenated, each closely implicated in, and part of, the
        other. Accordingly, both the social and the technological are imagined
        Correspondingauthor:AshAmin.Email:ash.amin@geog.cam.ac.uk
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      138                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      as hybrids of human and nonhuman association, with infrastructure
      conceptualized as a sociotechnical assemblage, and urban social life as
      never reducible to the purely human alone. There is nothing a-social,
      mechanistic or reductionist about how this writing imagines infrastruc-
      ture, thus providing an interesting opportunity to reimagine the city as
      both a social and a technical arrangement. In this paper, I focus on the
      insight offered by the new infrastructural turn in making sense of human
      being and sociality in the city, in ways that acknowledge the liveliness of
      socio-technical systems, and this even in the places of infrastructural
      absence orfailure. Indeed,my exploration of humanprospects and iden-
      tities in the city is based in an analysis of the agency of the absences and
      presences of the very basics of urban provisioning such as water, electri-
      city, sanitation, and low-cost housing in the slums and un-serviced out-
      skirts occupied by the poor in the city of Belo Horizonte in Brazil.
        Thenewthinkingreimaginestheurbansocialinthreesignificantways.
      First, in approaching the city as a provisioning machine, it shows how
      thesocio-technicalitiesregulatingthedistributionofstaplessuchasfood,
      water,electricity,sanitation,healthcare,informationandknowledgecen-
      trally determine the character of urban wellbeing and sustainability
      (Graham and Marvin, 2001; Heynen et al., 2006). Typically, it reveals
      how some cities are let down by failed, incomplete or mismanaged infra-
      structures, forever patched up by improvised measures that most tax the
      poor (Pieterse and Hyman, 2014; Jaglin, 2014; de Boeck, 2013; Graham,
      2010; Humphrey, 2003); and, conversely, how other cities manage to
      stave off the unforeseen complications of complex provisioning systems
      by building in excess capacity, circuit breaks, and intelligence and slack
      withinandacrossthecity’sinfrastructuralnetworks(Lahoud,2010;Vale
      andCampanella,2005;Batty,2013).Importantly,thiswritingshowsthat
      there is nothing purely technical or mechanical about even the most
      digitizedinfrastructures, revealedinsteadascomplexes ofsocio-technical
      alignment and allocation composed of corporate interests, regulatory
      standards, social expectations, hybrids of human-software-hardware
      intelligence, and historical legacies of organization and supply
      (Greenfield, 2013; Kitchin and Dodge, 2011; Halpern et al., 2013).
      The urban infrastructures are shown to be social in every respect.
        This includes, secondly, their symbolic power and their social select-
      iveness.Thenewwritingrevivesalongertraditioninterestedintheaffect-
      ive and aesthetic qualities of the urban infrastructure, showing, for
      example, how public sentiments of progress, modernity and wellbeing
      become attached to iconic buildings, highways, or new housing and
      shopping complexes, regardless of their functionality and material
      impact (Harvey and Knox, 2012; Manton, 2013). The literature illus-
      trates how the hopes and ideals sustained and the promises glimpsed
      render the incomplete and often unfulfilling present bearable, and how
      the emblematic material makes for an imagined commons of shared

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         139     
                                                             
        affectsandassetssupposedtoironoutthedivisionsanddifferencesofthe
        everyday city. Yet, ironically, these differences and divisions are also
        scripted into the workings of infrastructure: the rules and tariffs of
        supply, the socio-spatial decisions of providers, the selectivity scripted
        into software calculations of allocation (such that ‘pipes turn out to be
        documents’; Larkin, 2013: 335), the sharp differences of access between
        the rich and the poor and the constant battle between them over public
        goods (Graham et al., 2013). To render visible the detail of urban infra-
        structurewouldbetoreveal preciselytheseimbalances. TofollowSaskia
        Sassen’s suggestion that ‘all the major infrastructures in a city – from
        sewage to electricity and broadband – should be encased in transparent
        walls and floors at certain crossroads, such as bus stops or public
        squares’, would be to not only disclose their centrality to urban metab-
        olism but also their unequal distribution, amplifying the freight of her
        conclusion that if ‘you can see it all, you can get engaged’ (2012: 14).
         Thirdly,andmostinnovatively,thenewwritingshowshowinfrastruc-
        tures – visible and invisible, grand and prosaic – are implicated in the
        human experience of the city and in shaping social identities (Tonkiss,
        2013). Some of this work alludes to particular habits such as improvisa-
        tion oropportunism andtoparticular affectssuchasenduranceoranger
        whenresidentsarechallengedbyurbanutilitiesandservicesnotworking
        or being inaccessible, while other work shows how the good life and
        cultural practices of those able to enjoy access are designated by the
        urban infrastructure (Simone, 2004; McFarlane, 2011; Sundaram, 2010;
        Amin, 2013a). Other work concentrates more directly on infrastructure
        as aesthesis (Larkin, 2013), that is, as a sensory landscape that both
        extends and works on human being and sociality in its dwelling. Here,
        the circulation of sights, smells, sounds and signs, or the assemblage of
        buildings, technologies, objects and goods, are seen to shape social
        behaviour as well as affective and ethical dispositions (Amin, in press;
        de Boeck, 2012; Hirschkind, 2006; Shepard 2011; Rhys-Taylor, 2013).
        Howthehabitatanditsinhabitationextendtheboundariesofthehuman
        is insightfully illustrated, eschewing any notion of a clear human interior
        andaseparateenvironmentalexterior.Thoughtsandfeelings,alongwith
        social dispositions, appear as formed in the interactions of the sentient
        body and a sentient landscape with varying degrees of intelligence incor-
        porated in its infrastructures (Thrift, 2014; Mackenzie, 2010).
         These reorientations script the city and its inhabitants in novel ways,
        astheydoinfrastructureitself,nowimaginedasasocio-technicalprocess
        with diverseagentivepowers(Harvey,2012).The resultisthebirthof an
        excitinganthropologyofinfrastructurethatforegroundstheurbanback-
        stage to reveal the sociality of roads, pipes, cables, broadband, code and
        classification and the enrolments of the socio-technical systems that they
        are part of, and which make the modern city the machine that it is,
        however efficient (cf. Mahvunga, 2013; Tousignant, 2013; Larkin, 2004;

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      140                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      Elyachar, 2010).AsBrian Larkin(2013)arguesin animportant essay on
      infrastructureaspoliticsandpoetics,thekindofworksummarizedabove
      cautions against taking urban infrastructures for granted and, if any-
      thing, prompts effort to understand ‘how (in)visibility is mobilized and
      why’ (2013: 336).                                      
        In this paper, I take up Larkin’s invitation to consider the poetics and
      politics of infrastructural visibility and invisibility by focusing on the
      struggle in poor informal urban settlements over staples generally avail-
      able to the better-off elsewhere in a city. I am interested especially in the
      social power of infrastructural visibility – when the poor and their advo-
      catesorganizetobuildorprocureservicesinnewsitesofsettlement,with
      the effort dominating landscape, labour and sociality – and in the affor-
      dancesofinfrastructuralinvisibility–whenconnectivitytothemunicipal
      mains for water, electricity, sanitation and transport is eventually
      secured, momentarily hiding the trials and technologies of procurement.
        My material is drawn from Belo Horizonte in Brazil, based on a case
      study of three organized land occupations by the poor, and also the
      favela of Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima, one of four favelas that make up
      thecity’slargestandoldestinformalsettlement–AglomeradodaSerra–
      that houses 50,000 people, and where it has taken some 40 years
      for trunk infrastructures to become part of the invisible background
      of supply. In the occupations, the visibility of infrastructure in the
      making has been crucial in the construction of place, community,
      sociality and political claim, while in the favela, the invisibility of provi-
      sioning from trunk infrastructures has allowed Nossa Senhora de
      Fa´tima’sresidentsto hesitantly leadfullerlives and exercisetheircitizen-
      ship. Both visibility and invisibility turn out to be equally productive in
      different ways.                                        
      Infrastructure Visible                                 
                                                             
      Eliana Silva, Rosa Lea˜o and Dandara, all named after heroines of past
      popular struggles, are three of the handful of occupations that have
      sprung up on the outskirts of Belo Horizonte in the last four years
      (Figure 1). They echo a long and fraught history of urban settlement
      byillegal occupation bymigrantsand the poorin Brazil, tacitly accepted
      by the authorities as a form of bottom-up urbanization involving min-
      imal demands on the public purse, but always resolutely and often vio-
      lently opposed by landowners, speculators, planners, municipalities,
      elites and a judiciary in denial of facilitative laws (Holston, 2008;
      McCann, 2014; Fischer, 2014). Each occupation involves between 300
      and 1300 poor families – homeless or living in crowded conditions or
      strugglingtomeetrentpayments–thathavetakentheboldsteptobuild
      concrete and brick homes, public spaces, and diverse infrastructures on
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         141     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Figure 1. Location of occupations.                   
                                                             
                                                             
        disused privateorpublic land,knowingthattheycouldbeevictedat any
        time and, before that, harassed by their opponents.  
         The occupation process has not involved a slow drip of individual
        families following the lead of others, taking what they want, building
        how they wish, and relying on their own initiative alone. Instead, the
        occupations have been organized, led by pro-poor housing movements
        such as the Brigadas Popolares (BP) or the Movimento de Luta nos
        Bairros, Vilas e Favelas (MLB), university architects, lawyers and
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      142                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      planners, diverse social justice organizations, and representatives elected
      bythefamilies.Theselectionofthesiteanditsplotsandthetimingofthe
      occupationiscoordinatedandtheambitionoftheleadersandadvisersis
      to stop the occupations from becoming slums by designing in orderly
      settlementandcompliancewithurbanplanningguidelines rightfromthe
      start. Each occupation has followed a settlement design drawn by the
      professionals and activists in consultation with the families. The designs
      outline standardized plot sizes, protected green areas, risky inclines to be
      avoided, sanitation and waste disposal procedures, water and electricity
      sources, street lay-out and architecture, and shared spaces such as com-
      munity centres, cre`ches, play areas, churches, and allotments.
        Theaimistobuildaneighbourhoodthatmeetsstandardplanningand
      legal requirements, and a community that is more than the sum of its
      individualplotsandlives.Typically,aftermonthsofnegotiationoverthe
      details of the settlement plan between the families, their representatives,
      and the architects and social activists, an occupation rapidly unfolds. In
      the time between dodging eviction during a period of days when the
      police can intervene on grounds of criminal infringement, and a period
      of months peppered with acts of harassment when claims and counter-
      claimsarejudiciallyreviewed,therefollowsaflurryofbuildingactivityin
      the hope that the authorities will be persuaded to recognize the merits of
      an orderly process of neighbourhood formation and organization. The
      flimsy shelters made of wood and plastic sheeting are turned into single
      or double-storey brick and cement houses, the roads and sanitation pits
      are built, the supply of water and electricity is made secure, the commer-
      cial ventures are established, the places in nearby schools, workplaces
      and health centres are sought out, and work on diverse shared spaces,
      from churches to communal kitchens and toilets, is commenced. On a
      barren stretch of land on the far outskirts of the city, but close to mains
      water and electricity supply, the new occupants invest a vast amount of
      labour,money,materials,hope,hardshipandgoodwillinfullknowledge
      that all could be lost in a sweep, that violation will be met with violence.
        Countertotheirwholesalenegativecharacterizationbytheauthorities
      and the middleclasses, the occupationstell astory of remarkable human
      achievement in the most adverse circumstances. On the ground, we find
      people without means risking everything to exercise a formally recog-
      nizedrighttoshelter,enduringallmannerofdeprivationanduncertainty
      to build something out of nothing on unstable or contaminated terrain.
      We discover the extraordinary skills and imagination applied to turn
      hastily built shacks into concrete and brick homes in a matter of
      months. We encounter the commitment of people with pressing personal
      needsandworriesworkingwithneighbourstopiratewaterandelectricity
      for the settlement and to build streets, cre`ches, churches, and other com-
      munal facilities. We see the forbearance involved in building a home,
      travelling long distances to shop, find work, seek education and health

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         143     
                                                             
        care, participating in meetings and events to secure rights, setting up
        commercial ventures in the backyard, exchanging favours, meeting
        basic needs in rudimentary conditions, and facing multiple risks and
        uncertainties. We see how in the midst of all of this time is found for
        building associational life, friendships, neighbourly relations, a local
        commons.Weencounterthededicationoftheprofessionalexperts,activ-
        istsandcommunitycoordinatorspreparedtoworkforfreeformonthon
        end to transform the occupation into a decent urban settlement.
         But the story of settlement, including the above socialities, can also be
        told in a different way, as a mise en scene by infrastructure. Nothing is
        more striking than the visibility and sound of housing, sanitation, water
        andelectricity,streetsandlandscapesinthemaking.Theunfoldinginfra-
        structure is the object of attention, the frame of values and affects, the
        grid of neighbourhood, and the matter of wellbeing, sociality and strug-
        gle. It commandeers the settlement process, including the lives, concerns
        and affects of the settlers, as the three examples below of infrastructural
        performativity at different stages of the life of an occupation illustrate.
        Infra-designation                                    
        All three occupations have been instantiated in quite significant ways by
        otherwisemundanemodelsdesignedbyarchitectsofthePraxisGroupat
        the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG) who work on social
        housing and also with the poor on self-build projects (Morado
        Nascimento, 2012). The three-dimensional latex models, the size of a
        small table (Figure 2), are continuously altered in their detail in the
        courseofdiscussionwiththeresidentsandtheirleadersovertheaccurate
        number of occupying households, the size of individual plots, and the
        scopeforsharedownership(generally opposedbytheresidents). Eagerly
        awaitedasthesignaltocommencebuildingafterdaysandweeksofliving
        inonlyacornerofthesettlementandunderflimsystructures,themodels
        visualizethegreenareasthatshouldbeprotected,thecontoursandgeol-
        ogy of the landscape of safe build, the location and arrangement of
        individual plots, the lay-out of streets, services and communal spaces,
        and the total space and aesthetic of the settlement. 
         The agency of these rather makeshift models has been immense. First,
        theyhavemappedthecommunitytocomeanditsmodusoperandi.They
        have signalled an orderly occupation right from the start, and in turn
        directed the unfolding developments as well as correcting most errant
        departures. In visualizing the whole settlement and individual fit within
        it, residents have come to see and agree the total number and lay-out of
        the plots to be allocated, the spaces to be avoided, the occupants who
        need to be moved, the green areas and creeks to be protected, the shared
        andcommunalfacilitiestobebuilt,thefairnessofthestandardplotsizes
        selected. Much of this has been actively debated, and sometimes it has
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      144                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 2. Model ofRosaLea˜o.                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      beencontestedbyresidentsorignoredbytheself-centredhousehold,but
      theoverallpowerofsocialdesignationofthemodelshasremainedintact.
        Secondly, the models have played an important pedagogic and mobi-
      lizing function. The collaboration between the architects, activists and
      residents in designing the settlement has nudged the future inhabitants
      and their representatives towards becoming knowledgeable interlocutors
      and collective actors. Long and protracted discussions over the design of
      the occupation have tapped into and valorized the lay expertise of the
      residents, taught the community leaders to hone their negotiation skills,
      brought into the open unacceptable opportunist or rogue behaviour,
      placed the private within a frame of collective interest and need, and
      strengthened community knowledge and power in dealing with the
      authorities. Around the models has emerged a sense of place, commu-
      nity, and belonging, guiding development, shaping social awareness,
      mediating negotiations, and unlocking expertise.       
        Thirdly, the models act as a call to order. They can be quickly forgot-
      ten when the frenzy of individual pursuit digs in, when the leadership is
      tested by waning community interest or the infringements of criminals
      and drug-traffickers, when the incursions of the authorities or powerful
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         145     
                                                             
        intermediaries threaten agreed plans, and when the architects and activ-
        ists have receded into the background. Their durability is by no means
        guaranteed, but they do survive as a powerful – and often only – mne-
        monic of the originally negotiated settlement, helping leaders and early
        settlerstobringdevelopments backintoline, remindthecommunityofa
        design intended to benefit everyone as well as improve the chances of
        formal recognition from the authorities, and mobilize against damaging
        new infringements. The models trace the line between the planned and
        unplanned informal settlement (see Valladares (2006) for the history of
        categorization of Brazilian favelas).                
        Infra-being                                          
                                                             
        It is a line that is easily blurred and quickly forgotten once the labour of
        building homes, utilities and the neighbourhood gets under way, along
        withthetrialsofsecuringaliving,therighttostay,andsafesurvival.Yet
        this is precisely when the visibility of the infrastructures of place emerge
        astheprimarymetonymofplace,commandingdailyattentionandshap-
        ing social orientation and affect. The social force of infrastructure is
        unmistakable,crystallizedaroundthedocumentsdesignating‘ownership’
        ofaplot,thebricks,corrugatedmetalandplastictanksassembledforthe
        houses, the poles, wires and tubes put into place to pirate water and
        electricity, the spaces cleared for play areas, churches, roads and toilet
        blocs,andthevehicles, mobilephonesandtelevisions facilitating contact
        withtheoutsideworld(Figure3).Theseobjects,andthecares,skillsand
        chains of possibility they gather, dominate the spatial and social land-
        scape of the emerging settlement.                    
         Within the individual household, this agency is manifest in the atten-
        tion given to, and commanded by, building a house piece by piece when
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Figure 3. First infrastructures:Rosa Lea˜o.          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      146                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      time and resource allow, the measures taken to pirate water and electri-
      city, build sanitary pits, and make indoor or outdoor showers and kit-
      chens, making a house into a home by decorating and furnishing rooms,
      travellinglongdistancestosecureearningsandtobuygoods,negotiating
      accesstofarawayschools,clinicsandotherwelfareservices,andseeingto
      the daily denials, disruptions and repairs caused by infrastructural
      improvisation. This is a process of infrastructural crafting that mixes
      the ‘thrill’ of home ownership, the satisfaction of artisanal accomplish-
      ment, and the satisfaction of working with others with the anxieties of
      exposure to the natural elements or to criminal or police violence, the
      dangers of live wires causing fires and sanitation pits flowing over, and
      the worries of securing the wellbeing of the family. So many cares, feel-
      ings and dispositions are arraigned through infrastructural interactions.
        Then,beyondthehousehold,lietheremindersofincompleteormake-
      shiftinfrastructures:thelow-hangingelectricwireseverywherethatcould
      soeasilyfallorsnap,theunfinishedroadsandtracksthrowingupdustor
      becoming quagmires in the rain, the cracks in the ground opened up by
      theelements andtherivuletsformedbyunmanagedgreywater,theseep-
      age from badly constructed sanitation pits, and the trash that gathers in
      untendedspaces.Theinfrastructure-formedaestheticisnotallbad,foras
      and when the settlement becomes more diverse and organized, into the
      aesthetic are incorporated the hoardings advertising commercial prod-
      ucts or religious opportunities, the greenness of protected areas, planted
      trees and shrubs, and tended private gardens and community farms, and
      the orderliness of maintained communal spaces such as play areas,
      cre`ches and community centres.                        
        These hyper-visible and constantly evolving infrastructural develop-
      ments make the atmosphere of place that forms the precognitive of
      mental, sensory and affective dispositions: the residents’ experience of
      living in the settlement, their feelings and obligations towards each
      other, their attachment and responsibility towards shared public
      spaces, their expectations from the commons (which range from envir-
      onmental disregard and cohabitation with the makeshift to hyper-
      cleanliness within the private compound and participating in improving
      communal spaces).                                      
      Infra-commoning                                        
      How the communal landscape looks, and how it is curated and spoken
      of, turns out to be quite significant in shaping sociality. Five years since
      the Dandara occupation in 2009 (Figure 4), the resonance between col-
      lectivecultureandtheaestheticofplaceisunderstrain,despitetheefforts
      of community leaders to cleave to collectively agreed rules, keep public
      spaces free from encroachment, and raise environmental awareness.
      Many of the settlement’s open spaces gather rubbish and look unkempt,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         147     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Figure 4. Infra-commoning: Dandara.                  
                                                             
                                                             
        its uneven roads are crossed by rivulets of grey water gathering in smelly
        pools, the poorly designed sanitation pits in every home threaten to spill
        over,andsomehouseholdshavebrokentheagreementtokeepeveryplot
        size standard by extending their properties. Only some exceptions stand
        out,albeitwithconsiderablesymbolicpowerasamnemonicofcollective
        possibility. One is the community farm that grows fruit, vegetables and
        herbs for sale and also for distribution to Dandara’s poorest families,
        an oasis only because the energetic and experienced elderly woman tend-
        ing it had to get rid of all the collectivist malingerers to make it into
        a going concern. Another is a large and beautifully decorated church
        built from donations and the skills and care of Dandara’s residents
        and which is cherished by the settlement’s large Catholic community.
        A third is the community centre, used for meetings but also as a library
        and classroom, bringing much needed learning opportunities to
        Dandara’s children.                                  
         My impression, however, is that such exceptions – taken forward by a
        small number of community leaders and activists – will not stop the
        general drift towards an under-curated public landscape. The state of
        neglect is likely to get worse as private interests increasingly come to
        the fore in this neighbourhood of 1200 households, as the first phase
        of coming together in order to sustain the occupation, map the territory
        and acquire individual plots gives way to a second phase of living in the
        neighbourhood as an individuated homely space. This is a sociality rein-
        forced by the aesthetic of the landscape and continuing spatial differen-
        tiation, and it presses heavily on a leadership harried by the multiple
        demands of a large settlement, its constant negotiations with the autho-
        rities for recognition, the growing counter-power of drug traffickers, and
        thepersonalburdenonindividualstoearnanincome,buildahome,and
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      148                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 5. Infra-commons: Eliana Silva.                 
                                                             
                                                             
      maintain afamily at thesame time as workingforthecommunity. There
      isanintricateplaybetweentheinfrastructuralaesthetic,socialpraxisand
      collective organization shaping the culture of the commons.
        Incontrast,theconditionandcultureofthecommonsisverydifferent
      in Eliana Silva, which houses only 300 families, is still in its early stages
      of build since occupation in 2012, and is led by a widely respected and
      charismaticMLBactivistwhodecidedtobuildhisownhomeintheheart
      of the settlement. Here, work on communal projects has moved in pace
      with that on individual homes, thanks to the commitment of the coord-
      inators, active residents and external advisers and volunteers to imple-
      ment original plans for shared space right from the outset. There are
      numerousinitiatives,somecompleted,someongoing,andothersplanned
      (Figure 5). They include making sure that solid waste is deposited in
      appropriate places, securing lighting for the main streets, encouraging
      families to channel grey water into areas of soft earth, preserving and
      adding vegetation in open spaces, building an airy community cre`che/
      centre, maintaining a protective rim around fresh water streams,
      involving many people in the community farm, planning a ceramics
      workshop that will make house signs, keeping the block of public toilets
      and washbasins clean, getting households to co-own and build a market-
      tested low-cost sanitation pit topped with water-absorbing plants
      (‘Tevap’), and preventing the subdivision of a property or its sale for
      at least four years and granting rights over only the building and not
      the plot.                                              
        It is hard to predict whether, in the fullness of time, the culture of the
      commons will goin the same direction as thatin Dandara. It might doif
      the strength of leadership and community involvement weakens or if
      private interests come to displace collective ones. On the other hand,
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         149     
                                                             
        the very aesthetic and functionality of a working commons – the obstin-
        acy of infrastructure shared – might help to maintain the collective ethos
        –actingasareminderofservicesandspacesthatarevalued,summoning
        civicparticipationandcareforthecommons,andmateriallymergingthe
        private and the public. The materials, coalitions and visual iconography
        involved in making commoning both ordinary and necessary could
        ensure a different future for Eliana Silva.          
         It is unclear how the reciprocities of infrastructure and sociality will
        playoutinRosaLea˜o,themostrecentofthethreeoccupations,initiated
        in early 2013. This is a large occupation involving 1300 families spread
        out across an undulating hillside whose topography does not lend itself
        to easy visualization by the community of the whole. The occupation is
        highly controversial as it is on land within the last green belt north of
        Belo Horizonte, which has been designated by the authorities for formal
        housing expansion. At the time of my visit in September 2013, many
        wood and plastic sheeting constructions had already sprung up, serviced
        by pirated electricity and water, and work had begun on the main roads.
        But the settlement design and plot allocations had yet to be finalized, as
        the architects awaited the final head count and the outcome of difficult
        negotiations between a recently formed and fragile leadership and an
        expectant community that the size of the land available for safe and
        planning-sensitive build would necessitate halving anticipated individual
        plot sizes.                                          
         Though Rosa Lea˜o began as a spontaneous occupation, it soon drew
        in MLB activists, university experts and other advocates of the poor
        (e.g. from liberation theology) to help map and design the settlement,
        guide plot allocation, designate public spaces,identify riskyterrains, and
        protect environmentally sensitive areas. Like the other occupations, the
        signs of common orientation and collective organization right from the
        start are unmistakeable, manifest in the strength of MLB and BP pres-
        ence, the planned designation of private, public and shared spaces, the
        frequent meetings between activists, advisers and residents to engender a
        culture of knowledge sharing and co-responsibility, the charisma and
        force of its leading spokesman, Father Gilvander Luis Moreira, the
        murals and hoardings calling for solidarity, the success in relocating
        families that had moved into environmentally sensitive areas, the enthu-
        siasm and commitment of the community representatives, and the will-
        ingness of occupiers to help build trunk infrastructures and to come to
        the aid of the most vulnerable.                      
         Suchearlysigns,whichwerealsoevidentinDandara’searlydays,could
        easilyunravel.Already,theyhavebeenputtothetestbytheloudthreats
        ofevictionfromandtheviolentconfrontationswiththeauthoritiesowing
        to the occupation’s sensitive location, by an inexperienced leadership
        being ignored by the residents or opposed by rogue builders on unallo-
        cated land and drug traffickers with other interests in mind, and by the

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      150                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      rushoftheoccupierstobuildahomeamidstthefearofbeingallocateda
      smallerthanexpectedplot.Againstthesepressures,itisnotclearwhether
      thepracticesofcommoningwillstickinthewaytheyhaveforElianaSilva:
      the topography gets in the way of making the whole settlement and its
      shared spaces visible to all, while the mnemonics of pooled interdepend-
      ence remains scant and fragile, leaving almost everything to the vicissi-
      tudes of effective leadership and community goodwill.  
                                                             
                                                             
      Infrastructure Invisible                               
      In Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima, four decades after the first illegal occupa-
      tion of the slopes of the mountain that closes in on the city, the days of
      thinking, feeling and living through the improved urban infrastructure
      are largely over for its 10,000 inhabitants (Figure 6). The houses and
      streets have mains water, electricity, and sewage connectivity. The
      roads are paved (and recently also the many paths that cross the steep
      inclines) and lined with commercial activity and traffic. The constantly
      extended and divided houses are densely packed together, rented,
      sold, and much sought after for their close proximity to the city centre.
      There are banks, restaurants, civic associations, schools and health
      centres in the neighbourhood. The balance between living safely and
      sociably and facing police violence and drug criminality is tipping
      slowly towards the former. By law, Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima may be
      an informal settlement, but like so many of Brazil’s urban favelas, it
      is in all other respects a thriving, well-functioning and organized
      city neighbourhood, built by the poor, recognized and serviced by the
      authorities, and increasingly attracting the gaze of tourists and gentri-
      fiers.LikeinotherfavelasofBrazil,thedistinctionbetweenthelegaland
      illegal, the formal and informal, and urban incorporation and exclusion
      is blurred.                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 6. NossaSenhora deFa´timainthe AglomeradodaSerra.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         151     
                                                             
         NossaSenhoradeFa´tima’stransitionfromrudimentaryoccupationto
        servicedneighbourhoodhasbeenlongandtaxing,andlikeelsewhere,full
        of conflicts, openings and closures, even during the quarter century of
        democracysincemilitaryrulethathascomewithfluctuatingpoliticaland
        institutional commitment to the poor (McCann, 2014; Perlman, 2010).
        The transition is the product of years of self-organization and social
        reciprocity, and of arduous civic mobilization – at times overshadowed
        by profiteering, criminal or clientelist interests – for land, housing and
        servicerights.Thelongprocessofinformalurbanizationtoleratedbythe
        authorities has eventually led to municipal upgrading of the favela’s
        trunkinfrastructuresandconnectivitytothecity’swater,electricity,sani-
        tation, and transport system, along with better access to diverse social
        services.Theproliferationofbuildingandthevigoroustradeofproperty
        – still without formal title deeds – has created a robust and complicated
        housing market of owned and rented dwellings. In Nossa Senhora de
        Fa´tima, the social prominence of the infrastructure has receded into the
        background of silent provisioning, even if the frustrations of regular and
        affordable supply of services continue to persist.   
         If infrastructure retains its role as a social mnemonic, it is as a remin-
        der of days in the recent past of manifest lack, the daily labour of carry-
        ing water and securing other services, and working with each other to
        makethefavelahabitable.Inthemakinginvisibleofinfrastructure,how-
        ever, it is not as though the sociality and social life of the material of
        provisioning has diminished. It has simply changed, and largely for the
        better. For Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima’s residents, having access to secure
        housing, mains water, electricity, sanitation, and transport connectivity
        has allowed them to lead fuller lives and to campaign for other basic
        needs such as better education, healthcare, and community protection
        (both from the police and drug gangs), and to participate more fully in
        the life of the city. The step is a significant accomplishment, one where
        finally some things can be taken for granted after years of self-reliance
        and struggle over the right to public goods assumed by the better-off
        elsewhere in the city, without which they would not be who they are,
        and the city reduced to dysfunctional chaos. In Nossa Senhora de
        Fa´tima, the concealment of the liveliness of infrastructure has
        been about the grind of daily procurement of certain staples being
        absorbed by the ‘skunkworks’ of public supply in the modern city
        (Goldstein, 2009; Amin, 2013b).                      
         The accomplishment, however, is double-edged, and certainly no neu-
        tralization of a politics of public provisioning stacked up against the
        urban poor. In Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima, and other favelas that have
        benefitted from municipal upgrading in Belo Horizonte and in other
        cities of Brazil, the cost of becoming part of the urban commons is
        never far from the surface (Guimara˜es, 1992). It includes the long wait
        for only partial and conditional access, the irritations of having to pay

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      152                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      forerraticsupplyandsufferpoorqualityinfrastructure,andwithfurther
      upgrading, the threat of displacement as land and property values rise
      and the better-off move in, and the indignity of not being allowed to
      shape new developments. This has become all too evident in the latest
      round of modernization.                                
        At the heart of the new developments is the Vila Viva programme
      funded and coordinated by the city’s Urban and Housing Development
      Company (URBEL). In resonance with the early Lula administration’s
      interest in bolstering the rights of the poor and improving conditions in
      favelas, Vila Viva was launched in 2005 to upgrade the city’s high risk
      andpoorareas(‘zonesofspecialsocialinterest’)bybuildingnewhousing
      and making infrastructural and environmental improvements (Inclusive
      Cities Laboratory, 2010). In Aglomerado da Serra, the programme had
      seen work on some 850 new apartments by late 2013, many more demo-
      litions and evictions from sites considered as environmentally risky or
      needed for infrastructural projects, and a set of communal interventions
      including social centres, green spaces, new trunk roads, paved pathways,
      and the linkage of houses to mains sanitation (Figure 7).
        If the programme has provided permanent new homes to some resi-
      dents and introduced new services and spaces, the return of infrastruc-
      turalvisibility comeswithdistinctlynewconnotations. Thenewhousing,
      for example, consists of clusters of standardized four-storey blocks
      painted in different colours to break the monotony. They are set apart
      from and tower abovethe densely packed low-rise favela houses of vary-
      ing shape, size and colour. While they house, at no cost of purchase,
      familiesmovedoutoflanddeemedenvironmentallyriskyorrequiredfor
      the new trunk road cutting through the Aglomerado, others less fortu-
      natehavebeenforcedtofendforthemselvesafterbeingevicted(lessthan
      halfofthe13,000evictedfamiliesinBeloHorizontehavebeenrehoused).
      Then, if the 40–45 square meter apartments are comfortable and well
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 7. Vila Viva inNossaSenhora daFatima.           
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         153     
                                                             
        serviced, the residents – used to building, adjusting and improvising –
        havenotbeenallowedtomakeanyalterationsorhangoutwashing,and
        thereisnospaceforsocialinteractionforthepeoplewhohavegrownup
        in the permeability between the private and the public, in the narrow
        stairwells and landings peppered with plants to make them look more
        humanorinthetightspaceoutsidebetweentheblocksandtheperimeter
        wall.Itisasthoughthefavelaaestheticandvernacularoflivinghasbeen
        deliberately silenced by design, deemed anomalous.   
         So, too, with the new and unusually wide trunk road that snakes up
        the hill and cuts through the Aglomerado, with its high banks and few
        exits, separating Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima from the other favelas. The
        road is a scar on the landscape, one that has taken out many more
        dwellings than necessary, created open spaces such as roundabouts and
        verges that are useless or a nuisance, and has barely any favela traffic on
        it. Contested, undesired, and costing a vast amount of money that could
        havebeenusedinmorebeneficialwayswithin thefavelas,thehighwayis
        an imposition that makes sense only as an intervention designed to
        shorten the commute of middle-class drivers from the city’s gated com-
        munities and suburbs into the centre of Belo Horizonte, to make circu-
        lationinthecityeasierduringtheWorldCupandotherbigevents.There
        are no smiling children standing on the verge waving at the shiny fast
        cars, no favela vehicles pouring onto it to take advantage of opportu-
        nitieselsewhere,noNossaSenhoradeFa´timaresidentswalkingacrossto
        the other favelas. It is hard not to think of the highway – and the new
        housing – as a step towards making a prime location ready for gentrifi-
        cation, erasing the markings of a neighbourhood built by the skill and
        ingenuityofthepoor(seeJacques,2013,onaestheticconflictsinfavelas).
         The ‘environmental’ interventions of Vila Viva are equally suspect.
        The steep river gullies running down the Serra, along which precarious
        but imaginatively built houses once perched, and which displayed many
        tended gardens, pathways, and domestic or farm animals, have been
        fenced off by Vila Viva. Designated environmentally risky or sensitive
        areas, the slopes of the gullies have become a wasteland, left to ruin,
        overgrow, collect dumped material and hide the activities of those who
        do not wish to be seen, peppered with ruined buildings, fruit trees and
        cultivatedperennialsasforlornremindersofthepast.Riskybutmanaged
        nature has become unkempt and unused, with no one the better off for
        this. The planners of Vila Viva did not bother to ask those who lived
        alongthegullieshowtheirdwellingscouldbemademoresecure,howthe
        landscape could be better managed, how the slopes could be stabilized.
        Once again, local knowledge and the vernacular were dismissed, indeed
        not even acknowledged, prompting the thought that the new wild areas
        with ruins from the past will one day provide a pleasant historical sur-
        roundsforthenewvillastocomeandtodayawarningtoresidentsofthe
        shape of things to come.                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      154                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 8. Vernacular NosaSenhoradeFa´tima.             
                                                             
        These are the impositions of design dumped from above, without any
      regard for the knowledge, preferences and lifestyles of the people who
      made the favela liveable. They have made infrastructure – in the form of
      a highway, H-blocks and protected spaces – starkly visible and central
      again(atthesametimeasaddingtotheinvisibleinfrastructureofsupply
      by providing mains sanitation). This time, however, visibility has less to
      do with the making of life and community by the poor themselves than
      with the management of change in the name of urban social cohesion by
      disarmingthelocalvernacularandallthatithasprovided(Figure8).The
      authorities, in this allegedly pro-poor intervention, could have consulted
      widelywiththeresidentsofNossaSenhoradeFa´timaandinvolvedthem
      in design and decision-making, respected the land use pattern and aes-
      thetic, and merged the modern and traditional in sensitive ways. But this
      would be to assume no ulterior motives, no judgements of social worth,
      and no desire for a different kind of place. In Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima,
      theshortmomentoftheinfrastructurebecominginvisibleinhelpfulways
      for the favela has been overcast by the shadow of a new visibility of
      mixed promise.                                         
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      The machinations of Vila Viva are a timely reminder of how closely the
      destiny of the poor and the space of their affective, social and political
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         155     
                                                             
        orientations is governed by the policies and actions of ruling elites and
        institutions. In this regard, the traditional politics of power manifest in
        legal, governmental, corporate,bureaucratic, and associational rulesand
        practices have to be kept squarely in the frame. Vila Viva, and countless
        other past slum ‘upgrading’ programmes, disclose the developments and
        consequences initiated by the acts of instituted force: the designs of the
        powerful, the influence of elites, the rules and repetitions of law and
        bureaucracy, the decisions of political leaders, the pushes of the advo-
        cates and adversaries of the poor. Not much can besaid about the social
        life of poor neighbourhoods without an understanding of these forms of
        institutional authoring and their interplay.         
         The complex and variegated dynamic of this play is all too evident in
        urban Brazil, even during the short two decades of pro-poor Left rule
        after the overthrow of military dictatorship, waxing and waning over
        neoliberal reforms displacing the poor. Democratization, as James
        Holston (2008) argues, has produced a discourse of universal rights
        and citizenship, laws to recognize the property claims of the poor, and
        provisions to recognize the occupation of unused land for social need.
        Practice, however, has been highly differentiated in its social and spatial
        distributions owing to the persistence of discriminatory legacies, institu-
        tional inconsistencies and voids, and unimplemented or distorted consti-
        tutional commitments, but which has also unleashed acts of independent
        and insurgent citizenship among the urban working class and poor to
        acquire land, housing and services. These acts, in turn, have been vio-
        lently opposed by the discontents of direct democracy in the judiciary,
        police, central and municipal government, and criminal and client net-
        works thriving off poverty. Yet it remains the case that in Brazil the vast
        majority of housing for the poor is delivered via autoconstruction, legiti-
        matedbyofficialrecognitionofpurchasedlandclaims,andsometimesof
        the act of occupation.                               
         Thefortunesofthepoorlivingininformalurbansettlements,thus,are
        conditioned by at least three sets of institutional force: first, the disjunc-
        ture between the courts, political reforms, municipal authorities, and
        property owners or intermediaries relating to the rights of the occupants
        over land, property and services; secondly, the dispositions of regional
        and municipal leaders during different political cycles towards occupa-
        tions, favelas and the needs of their residents, which can make a consid-
        erable difference to the benefits acquired (McCann, 2014); and thirdly,
        the balance of power in a neighbourhood between clientelist patronage,
        community organization, involvement of NGOs and religious and
        social movements, criminal interests and the incursions of municipal
        authorities, regulating the potential for change. This is the foreground
        of favela politics, the arena of organized battle over the shades of well-
        being and abjection (Biehl, 2013).                   
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      156                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
        But, for the poor without means living in places of rudimentary pro-
      visioning, this is a battle over the staples of life, with questions of infra-
      structure right at the heart of struggle, individual and collective. The
      jostles of instituted force focus around the imperfect machinery of
      supply. As Holston observes (2008: 8), ‘the city is not merely the context
      of citizenship struggles. Its wraps of asphalt, concrete, and stucco, its
      infrastructure of electricity and plumbing also provide the substance.
      The peripheries constitute the space of city builders and their pioneering
      citizenship’, to which we can add also the battles launched by opponents
      to make the infrastructure work for counter-interests. Yet, as I hope the
      examples in this paper have illustrated, the liveliness of infrastructure
      involves more than its character as the object of community struggle,
      in the form of mundane socio-technicalities that are fundamental in
      shaping wellbeing, sociality, and organization, and in ways that often
      inflect the politics of the ‘foreground’ in unexpected ways.
        Thoughnosubstituteforpoliticaleconomy,ethnographiesofmaterial
      culturecanhelptorevealaddedmatterforapoliticsofsocialrecognition
      and justice – matter that might prove to be more than marginal. If cities
      are socio-technical allocation machines worked through the silent place-
      ments of diverse infrastructures, from water grids and public parks to
      schools and coding systems, they qualify the agency of human subjects
      and authorities in at least three ways: firstly, as less than supreme, sec-
      ondly as incorporated in the machinic, and thirdly, as dependent on the
      latter. This goes for all cities, regardless of their technical intensity,
      sophistication and spread, for even the most rudimentary, improvised
      and broken systems, as this paper has tried to show, are full of agency
      and meaning. Uncovered, the urban infrastructure turns out to be not
      only as active as any community or institution, but also the medium
      through which much of the latter is orchestrated.      
        This is another way of saying that though a politics of titles, pipes,
      bricks and pits may not appear as muscular or heroic as a politics of
      citizenship and power, it may in the short run help to meet the staple
      needs of urban majorities and, in the long run, enlarge the ground of the
      political in ways that not only allow subaltern interests to be pursued
      beyond established procedures biased towards the few, but also reduce
      thepre-eminenceofthelatterbyaddingmoremodesoforganizationand
      action into the political arena (Amin and Thrift, 2013). To return to
      Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima, the impositions of Vila Viva show that the
      subaltern cannot afford to give up on the politics of community organ-
      ization,activistcampaigning,municipalrecognition,andpartymobiliza-
      tion. To do sois to let the authorities get away with impositions thatjar,
      to ignore the right of the poor to demand citizenship and justice in a
      so-called democracy. Equally, the history of Nossa Senhora de Fa´tima,
      and that now unfolding in Dandara, Eliana Silva and Rosa Lea˜o, makes
      it amply clear that the right to the city is also a matter of claim through

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         157     
                                                             
        occupation, self-organization, infrastructural improvisation, and coun-
        ter-vernaculars of inhabitation and design (Caldeira, 2012). This is the
        ground of making life liveable, the city a plural ontology, and power
        more decentred, with much of this given collective orientation through
        joint effort in securing everyday infrastructure.    
         It is also the ground of speaking truth to power in an indirect way. In
        an ideal world, the citizens of a city or nation committed to universal
        wellbeing should expect the minima of survival to be made available
        throughthestate,theconstitution,orlegaladdress.Butthisismanifestly
        not the case in many democracies, for a host of reasons preventing the
        delivery of large-scale wellbeing. The gap between paper and real dem-
        ocracy remains large, and if anything it is widening today as the centri-
        petal tendencies of neoliberalism daily oust the centrifugal aspirations of
        social democracy. Nothing much is likely to change until the disenfran-
        chised organizeto claimtheirright,andwith effectiveforce, forwhatthe
        recent experience of urban occupation and clamour for social justice
        around the world has shown is that any tangible reforms won have
        beenovershadowedbytheassaultoforganizedpowertocrushthemove-
        ments or to manipulate them for new patterns of centralized return.
        Captured by elites, and barely used by the organized Left to further a
        politics of social transformation, neither representative nor direct dem-
        ocracy is delivering to the poor in straightforward ways. A restored
        activism can make for a provisioning invisibility because it presses on
        the state and other providers to deliver basic services as public goods.
        The state has to be brought in, perhaps dragged in by the scruff of
        the neck.                                            
         Inthisfarfrompermissive context, themakingofmicro-collectives by
        the poor around shared infrastructures (and other material of the urban
        commons) may be a necessary political opening. Occupation, and the
        co-construction of a habitable space through all kinds of infrastructural
        improvisation and innovation, has brought together people from differ-
        ent backgrounds into common endeavour, to discover the value of
        collective life by having something to work on collectively, to use infra-
        structure to address the larger city for rights and connections, as
        AbdouMaliq Simone has so persuasively shown in his work on
        Southern vernacular urbanism (most recently by the excluded middle
        classes in Jakarta; Simone, 2014). Most importantly, many though not
        alltheoccupationsareappropriationsdesignedtolivethecityinanother
        way–collectively, frugally,autonomously,creatively(Vasudevan,2014).
        None of this is easy work – the rewards are often insubstantial, and the
        politics of community is fraught with contradictions and conflicts. It
        would be a mistake to romanticize occupation and informality as a
        new dawn. However, in the making of the city along new lines – perhaps
        even for a fleeting moment – a new possible world emerges, new solida-
        rities are formed, and the right of the disenfranchised to claim the city is

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      158                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      exercised and shown to be possible. The city is a site of multiple forma-
      tions and social transformation is made visible, a spur to those with the
      power to change society for the better to act, if only they had the con-
      viction and commitment. Wishfully, we might speculate that occupation
      is a kick-start to the remaking of the just society.   
                                                             
      Acknowledgements                                       
      ThispapercouldnothavebeenevenimaginedwithoutthesupportofClelioCampolina
      Diniz,EduardoVargas,MauricioLoureiroandRobertoMonte-Mor,whomadeitpos-
      sibleformetotakeuptheIEATChairattheInstituteofTransdisciplinaryStudiesatthe
      Federal University of Minas Gerais in August and September 2013. I thank them for
      giving me the opportunity to visit Belo Horizonte and for looking after me so well. In
      turn, the paper could not have been written without the support of my collaborators
      DeniseMorado,LetaSilva,ThaisNassif,Cecı´liaReis,FelipeMagalha˜es,Joa˜oTonucci,
      andLevindoPereira,whoaretherealintelligencebehindthefindingsreported.Ofcourse
      they are not responsible for any errors and omissions. I am also grateful to Teresa
      Caldeira for her perceptive comments on the first draft. I dedicate the paper in
      memoryofCecı´lia’sfather,ProfessorFa´bioAlvesdosSantos,aprotagonistinthecam-
      paign for the rights of the poor in Belo Horizonte, who sadly passed away after a long
      illness shortlyafter my visit.                         
      References                                             
      Amin A (2013a) Telescopic urbanism and the urban poor. City 17(4): 476–492.
      AminA(2013b)Survivingthefuture. EnvironmentandPlanningD:Societyand
        Space 31: 140–156.                                   
      Amin A (in press) Animated space. Public Culture.      
      Amin A and Thrift N (2013) Arts of the Political: New Openings for the Left.
        Durham, NC: Duke University Press.                   
      Batty M (2013) The New Science of Cities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Biehl J (2013) Vita: Life in a Zone of Social Abandonment. Berkeley, CA:
        University of California Press.                      
      Caldeira T (2012) Imprinting and moving around: New visibilities and config-
        urations of public space in Sa˜o Paulo. Public Culture 24(2): 385–419.
      De Boeck F (2012) Infrastructure: Commentary from Filip De Boeck
        (Contributions from Urban Africa Towards an Anthropology of
        Infrastructure). Cultural Anthropology Online, 26 November. Available at:
        http://production.culanth.org/curated_collections/11-infrastructure/discus-
        sions/7-infrastructure-commentary-from-filip-de-boeck (accessed 9 August
        2014).                                               
      De Boeck F (2013) ‘Poverty’ and the politics of syncopation: Urban examples
        from Congo-Kinshasa (mimeo). Institute for Anthropological Research in
        Africa, University of Leuven.                        
      Elyachar J (2010) Phatic labour, infrastructure, and the question of empower-
        ment in Cairo. American Ethnologist 37(3): 452–464.  
      Fischer B (2014) Introduction. In: Fischer B, McCann B and Auyero J (eds)
        Cities from Scratch: Poverty and Informality in Urban Latin America.
        Durham, NC: Duke University Press.                   

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         159     
                                                             
        Goldstein BE (2009) Resilience to surprises through communicative planning.
         Ecology and Society 14(2): 33–44.                   
        Graham S (ed.) (2010) Disrupted Cities: When Infrastructure Fails. New York:
         Routledge.                                          
        Graham S and Marvin S (2001) Splintering Urbanism: Networked
         Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition. London:
         Routledge.                                          
        Graham S, McFarlane C and Desai R (2013) Water wars in Mumbai. Public
         Culture 25: 115–141.                                
        Greenfield A (2013) Against the Smart City. New York: Do Projects.
        Guimara˜esB(1992)FavelasemBeloHorizonte–tendeˆnciasedesafios.Ana´lise
         & Conjuntura 7(2/3): 11–18.                         
        Halpern O, LeCavalier J, Calvillo N and Pietsch W (2013) Test-bed urbanism.
         Public Culture 25(2): 273–306.                      
        Harvey P (2012) The topological quality of infrastructural relation: An ethno-
         graphic approach. Theory, Culture & Society 29(4/5): 76–92.
        Harvey P and Knox H (2013) The enchantments of infrastructure. Mobilities
         7(4): 521–536.                                      
        Heynen N, Kaı¨ka M and Swyngedouw E (eds) (2006) The Nature of Cities:
         Urban Political Ecology and the Politics of Urban Metabolism. London:
         Routledge.                                          
        Hirschkind C (2006) The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic
         Counterpublics. New York: Columbia University Press.
        Holston J (2008) Insurgent Citizenship: Disjunctions of Democracy and
         Modernity in Brazil. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
        Humphrey C (2003) Rethinking infrastructure: Siberian cities and the great
         freeze of January 2001. In: Schneider J and Susser I (eds) Wounded Cities:
         Destruction and Reconstruction in a Globalized World. Oxford: Berg,
         pp. 91–107.                                         
        InclusiveCitiesLaboratory(2010)BeloHorizonte,BrazilVillaVivaProgramme
         – Aglomerado da Serra. Working Paper, Development Planning Unity,
         University College, London.                         
        JacquesPB(2013)Urbanregeneration:Theimprovisationtacticsfromthefavelas
         vs.thespectacularisationofpublicspace.In:LearyMandMcCarthyJ(eds)The
         RoutledgeCompaniontoUrbanRegeneration.London:Routledge,pp.260–270.
        Jaglin S (2014) Regulating service delivery in southern cities: Rethinking urban
         heterogeneity. In: Parnell S and Oldfield S (eds) The Routledge Handbook on
         Cities of the Global South. London: Routledge.      
        Kitchin R and Dodge M (2011) Code/Space: Software and Everyday Life.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
        Lahoud A (2010) Introduction. In: Lahoud A, Rice C and Burke A (eds) Post-
         traumatic Urbanism. Chichester: John Wiley, pp. 14–23.
        Larkin B (2004) Degraded images, distorted sounds: Nigerian video and the
         infrastructure of piracy. Public Culture 16(2): 289–314.
        Larkin B (2013) The politics and poetics of infrastructure. Annual Review of
         Anthropology 42: 327–343.                           
        McCann B (2014) Hard Times in the Marvelous City: From Dictatorship to
         Democracy in the Favelas of Rio de Janeiro. Durham, NC: Duke University
         Press.                                              

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      160                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      McFarlane C (2011) The city as assemblage: Dwelling and urban space.
        Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29: 649–671.
      Mackenzie A (2010) Wirelessness: Radical Empiricism in Network Cultures.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                            
      Mahvunga C (2013) Cidades esfumac¸adas: Energy and the rural-urban connec-
        tion in Mozambique. Public Culture 25(2): 261–272.   
      Manton J (2013) ‘Environmental alkalism’ and the war on filth: The personifi-
        cation of sanitation in urban Nigeria. Africa 83(4): 606–622.
      Morado Nascimento D (2012) A (possı´vel) produc¸a˜o democratizada do
        espac¸o. Paper presented at II Encontro da Associac¸a˜o Nacional de
        Pesquisa e Po´sgraduac¸a˜o em Arquitetura e Urbanismo, Natal, 18–21
        September.                                           
      Mumford L (1938) The Culture of Cities. San Diego: Harcourt Brace.
      ParkR(1952)HumanCommunities:TheCityandHumanEcology.Glencoe,IL:
        The Free Press.                                      
      Perlman J (2010) Favela: Four Decades of Living on the Edge in Rio de Janeiro.
        New York: Oxford University Press.                   
      Pieterse E and Hyman K (2014) Disjunctures between urban infrastruc-
        ture, finance and affordability. In: Parnell S and Oldfield S (eds)
        The Routledge Handbook on Cities of the Global South. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Rhys-TaylorA(2013)Theessencesofmulticulture:Asensoryexplorationofan
        inner-city street market. Identities 20(4): 393–406. 
      SassenS(2012)Urbanisingtechnologies.In:BurdettRandRodeP(eds)Urban
        Age Electric City Conference. London: London School of Economics,
        pp. 12–14.                                           
      SennettR(1994)FleshandStone:TheBodyandtheCityinWesternCivilization.
        New York: Norton.                                    
      Shepard M (ed.) (2011) Sentient City: Ubiquitous Computing, Architecture, and
        the Future of Urban Space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
      Simone A (2004) People as infrastructure. Public Culture 16(3): 407–429.
      Simone A (2014) Jakarta: Drawing the City Near. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     
      Sundaram R (2010) Pirate Modernity. London: Routledge. 
      ThriftN(2014)The‘sentient’cityandwhatitmayportend(mimeo),University
        of Warwick.                                          
      Tonkiss F (2013) Cities by Design. Cambridge: Polity.  
      Tousignant N (2013) Insects-as-infrastructure: Indicating Project Locustox and
        the Sahelization of ecotoxicology. Science as Culture 22(1): 108–131.
      Vale L and Campanella T (eds) (2005) The Resilient City. New York: Oxford
        University Press.                                    
      Valladares L (2006) La favela d’un sie`cle a` l’autre; mythe d’origine, discours
        scientifiques et repre´sentations virtuelles. Paris: Editions de la MSH.
      Vasudevan A (2014) The autonomous city: Towards a critical geography of
        occupation. Progress in Human Geography (published online 30 April
        2014). DOI: 10.1177/0309132514531470.                

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amin                                         161     
                                                             
        Ash Amin holds the 1931 Chair in Geography at Cambridge
        University. His latest books include Land of Strangers (Polity Press,
        2012) and Arts of the Political (with Nigel Thrift, Duke University
        Press, 2013). He is currently completing a book with Nigel Thrift on
        the urban condition.                                 
                                                             
        This article is part of a Special Section on The Urban Problematic II,
        edited by Ryan Bishop and John Phillips. For extra material see:
        theoryculturesociety.org.                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             