[PAGE 1]
 1167774                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764231167774Theory, Culture & SocietyAtkinson
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Field Theory and  Assemblage           2024, Vol. 41(1) 79 –94
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
       Theory: Toward   a Constructive                       
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Dialogue                           sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462432131116677777744
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Will Atkinson                                         
       University of Bristol                                 
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This paper engages with Manuel DeLanda’s Deleuze-inspired ‘assemblage theory’ from
       a perspective sympathetic to Pierre Bourdieu’s field theory. It first outlines DeLanda’s
       proposed new ‘philosophy of society’, focusing on his major works in this vein, and
       registers some scepticism as to its originality for sociology. It then introduces and
       responds to DeLanda’s critique of Bourdieu. Rather than simply reject assemblage
       theory outright, however, I draw on selected insights from DeLanda to push field
       theory in new directions. More specifically, I conceptualise the interplay of fields and
       assemblages and use notions of ‘exteriority’ and ‘possibility space’ to help conceive
       individual plurality of social positioning and its effects for subjectivity and practice.
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       assemblage theory, Bourdieu, DeLanda, Deleuze, field theory
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       For almost three decades, urban theorist and philosopher Manuel DeLanda has been try-
       ing to wrestle from Gilles Deleuze’s giant opus a new ‘philosophy of society’. Departing
       from the usual deployment of Deleuze in social theory as an extension on the Marxist-
       Foucauldian tradition of ideology/discourse critique to examine contemporary ‘societies
       of control’ (Clough et al., 2007), DeLanda endeavours instead to offer clear and consist-
       ent concepts that purportedly dissolve some of the age-old antagonisms of social theory
       while being of concrete use to practising social scientists interested in explaining all
       manner of historical and contemporary events. More specifically, he champions, elabo-
       rates and generalises one concept drawn from Deleuze’s sprawling, enigmatic treatise
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Will Atkinson. Email: w.atkinson@bristol.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      80                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      co-authored with Felix Guattari on Capitalism and Schizophrenia (Deleuze and Guattari,
      1984, 1988); a concept that is held by DeLanda to traverse physics, chemistry, biology,
      ecology, psychology, sociology and history, among others. This is the concept of
      assemblage.                                            
        The term ‘assemblage’ is also used by actor-network theorists (ANTs) and, like most
      ANTs, DeLanda subscribes to a ‘flat ontology’, eschewing recourse to deep structures or
      hidden mechanisms, and a ‘generalized symmetry’ in which social, material and sym-
      bolic entities are treated equivalently. Sometimes, therefore, he is cited alongside ANT
      and Deleuze himself as a force within the ‘new materialist’ or ‘post-human’ currents of
      contemporary social theory (see e.g. Fox and Alldred, 2017), or is otherwise seen as a
      crucial force behind the rising popularity of the concept of assemblage for non-conven-
      tional forms of conceptualisation and explanation across social, political and geographi-
      cal theory (e.g. Anderson et al., 2012; Conway, 2022; Elliot and Urry, 2010; Marcus and
      Saka, 2006; Venn, 2006; Thrift, 2008). Like some ANTs, moreover, DeLanda has explic-
      itly positioned his contribution against that of Pierre Bourdieu. As part of his mission to
      advocate ‘assemblage theory’, as he calls it, DeLanda has compared and contrasted his
      ideas with foundational contributions of major sociologists, from Weber and Goffman to
      Giddens and Tilly. Many of these are treated sympathetically and their ideas converted
      into the language of assemblage theory. Bourdieu, however, is given a noticeably rougher
      ride. While noting some points of apparent convergence or harmony, DeLanda ultimately
      rejects both the notion of habitus and the notion of field (or social space). These rejec-
      tions have been noted, but not challenged, by other commentators (e.g. Adkins, 2013;
      Clough et al., 2007), and Fox and Alldred (2017) have even built on them in their synthe-
      sis of new materialist themes to discard Bourdieu’s specific vision of social class.
        The tasks of this paper are as follows. First, I aim to provide a clear summary of
      DeLanda’s assemblage theory in abstracto and as it relates to human agency and social
      structures, registering my scepticism as I go regarding its originality or usefulness in
      toto. Second, after noting some affinities of language between the two thinkers, I will
      summarise and respond to DeLanda’s critique of Bourdieu, essentially showing it to be
      highly questionable. Despite these problems, however, engaging with assemblage theory
      does prove fruitful for Bourdieusian social theory because specific insights from it allow
      us to push deeper on the interplay between fields, networks and the material world and
      the relational constitution of subjectivity than Bourdieu went, thus taking field theory in
      productive directions.                                 
        Some caveats before continuing. This paper does not try to compare the perspectives
      of Bourdieu and Deleuze himself, which would be a far larger and much more compli-
      cated task, nor am I interested in the degree to which DeLanda departs from or distorts
      Deleuze’s own ideas, which others certainly take issue with. Whether another ‘Deleuzian
      sociology’ is possible and superior, therefore, I leave aside. There are others, moreover,
      who advocate versions of ‘assemblage theory’, including Jane Bennett (e.g. Bennett,
      2010) and Ian Buchanan (e.g. Buchanan, 2020), offering similar ideas (without necessar-
      ily agreeing with one other), but not only do they refrain from targeting Bourdieu but
      they are much less interested than DeLanda in criticising, accommodating or otherwise
      comparing against large swathes of sociological or social theory. This is what makes
      DeLanda worthy of singling out, and why I will consider only the relationship between

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       81     
                                                             
       habitus/fields as defined and used by Bourdieu and assemblages as defined and used by
       DeLanda in what follows.                              
                                                             
       Assemblage Theory                                     
       DeLanda began contributing to social theory in the early 1990s, but assemblage theory
       per se only consolidated with the publication of A New Philosophy of Society (DeLanda,
       2006a) and subsequent works (esp. DeLanda, 2005, 2006b, 2008, 2009, 2016a, 2016b).
       In these he established that an assemblage is, at bottom, a processual fitting together of
       elements (‘segments’ or ‘lines’) into a whole. The notion is defined against ‘strata’ on the
       basis of how elements relate to one another. In a stratum, parts are defined by ‘interior-
       ity’, that is, exclusively in relation to one another, and exhibit complete homogeneity.
       Examples cited by DeLanda across works include geological strata (rock layers) but also
       social strata (classes) and family relations (DeLanda, 1997: 59ff, 2016a: xx). Assemblages,
       by contrast, are defined by ‘exteriority’: their component parts, while associated with
       one another, have relative autonomy from the assemblage – they are not exhaustively
       defined by it – and are heterogeneous. In DeLanda’s eyes, this constitutes a refutation of
       the Hegelian idea, otherwise present in almost all social theory, that parts are always
       defined relative to their place in a whole, or totality.
        The distinction between strata and assemblages is scalar rather than categorical: com-
       ponents can be bounded off and homogenised to different degrees depending on several
       factors, including ‘coding’, which is any process fixing the identity of an assemblage’s
       component parts. Language is a key vehicle for coding. ‘Territorialisation’, a term taken
       directly from Deleuze, is another factor, referring to the degree to which the boundaries
       of an assemblage are stabilised and made impermeable and its elements standardised.
       The difference from coding seems to be that territorialisation is not reducible to lan-
       guage. Instead, territorialisation can depend on either material or ‘expressive’ elements
       of an assemblage – a distinction which is, once again, scalar, according to DeLanda.
       Expressive elements do include linguistic segments – names, labels, etc. – but also sym-
       bols, iconography and so on, while material elements include specifically physical enti-
       ties, such as walls or doors. Both coding and territorialisation, however, are fully
       changeable and reversible – they can be undone and progress or regress at varying speeds
       depending on the morphology of the assemblage.        
        Assemblages possess emergent properties and capacities irreducible to their compo-
       nent parts. They possess things and can do things that the elements on their own cannot,
       just as water can flow or has a freezing point, unlike its individual hydrogen and oxygen
       atoms. Thus assemblages constrain and enable their elements, providing limits and
       opportunities for activity (downward causation), but at the same time assemblages would
       not exist without their relatively autonomous elements (upwards causation). This is cru-
       cial, in DeLanda’s mind, for avoiding the micro/macro division (which he also describes
       as the ‘molecular/molar’ division, after Deleuze) and the structure/agency division within
       social theory, because seeing assemblages as emergent entities avoids according them
       transcendent status over their constituents. Instead, it grants assemblages and segments
       equivalent ontological status – they are things equally. In the Deleuzian parlance, they
       exist on the ‘plane of immanence’. At the same time, assemblages do not exist in
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      82                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      categories with definitive essences but are always unique, singular individuals with their
      own trajectories (DeLanda, 2006a: ch. 2).              
        The properties and capacities of assemblages may be actualised or virtual, that is,
      exist in potentia without being actualised. To each assemblage, therefore, there corre-
      sponds a ‘possibility space’ or ‘diagram’ (sometimes referred to as the ‘multiplicity’): a
      kind of n-dimensional map of possible developments for the assemblage and its compo-
      nents – their ‘lines of flight’ – including as they relate to (d)territorialisation and (de)
      coding (DeLanda, 2016a: ch. 5). When it comes to causal analysis, however, social sci-
      entists must eschew linear thinking (A causes B) in favour of thinking in terms of spe-
      cific interactions and combinations of assemblages and components effecting the
      probabilities of specific lines of flight, including in the form of catalysis (DeLanda,
      2006a: 20) or feedback loops (on this see esp. DeLanda, 1997).1 They must also focus on
      the relevant emergent properties of assemblages rather than the activities of individual
      components if they are to avoid causal redundancy (DeLanda, 2006a).
        Similar to ANT, then, assemblage theory refuses to bound off the social or human
      from the material or symbolic; it places all entities, whether apparently individual (human
      persons) or collective (groups, classes, etc.), on the same plane of existence; and it attrib-
      utes agency – the capacity to affect possibilities – to humans and non-humans alike.
      Hence their conflation in many discussions. DeLanda is unapologetically realist in a
      more straightforward manner than most ANTs, however: assemblages, he says, exist
      independently of the conceptions our minds form of them (DeLanda, 2016a: ch. 6). In
      this he explicitly cleaves close to Bhaskar (1998, 2008), though he distances himself
      from the apparent essentialism lurking in the latter’s philosophy of science. DeLanda
      also heads off the common criticism levelled at ANT – rightly or wrongly – that it oper-
      ates with an undeveloped view of human agents and their unignorable specificity relative
      to other actants or segments (Collins and Yearley, 1992; Pels, 1995; Vandenberghe,
      2002). This is because DeLanda (2006a: ch. 3, 2011, 2016a: 26ff) offers a vision of what
      makes up humans qua subjects or agents, i.e. on what basis they have the capacity to un/
      intentionally affect possibilities, and perhaps it is no surprise that it boils down to seeing
      human beings as themselves assemblages.                
      The Model of the Subject                               
      Inspired by Deleuze’s reading of David Hume, DeLanda casts the human agent as an
      assemblage of experiences understood as sense impressions of varying intensity. These
      are bound together by relations of association and territorialised via habitual repetition,
      though they can also be deterritorialised by the acquisition of new skills, since these
      change the capacities and properties of the agent, or anything disrupting routine. Material
      elements of the assemblage include biological/neurological processes and expressive
      components include ideas and language, the latter of which can inform beliefs under-
      stood as ‘attitudes toward propositions’ (DeLanda, 2006a: 23, 52). However, DeLanda
      stresses the distinction of his Deleuzean-Humean model of human agency from a sup-
      posed neo-Kantianism holding that all sense impressions are read through existing clas-
      sifications and, more specifically, a linguistic version in which human thought is always
      structured by language (he seems to be alluding to the Sapir-Whorf thesis here). This
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       83     
                                                             
       approach is falsified, he suggests, by the fact that experiential association facilitating
       object recognition and complex ‘scene analysis’ predated language acquisition histori-
       cally (and also, we might add with a nod to Piaget, in childhood) (DeLanda, 2011).
        In practice, however, DeLanda’s model of human agency is neither original nor sound.
       It ultimately boils down to saying that reasons and motives should be factored into social
       explanation (DeLanda, 2006a: ch. 1), echoing Weber, but only if they appear to make a
       difference to the operations of assemblages (if we can explain developments in terms of
       emergent properties, then we ignore them). These motives are based on beliefs and
       desires, which are the product of socialisation (DeLanda, 2006a: 24–5), and that sociali-
       sation is essentially a process of instrumental conditioning. Human beings ‘match means
       to ends’, and, to quote:                              
        the choice of ends depends entirely on the passions: on the habitual pursuit of those ends
        associated with pleasurable or positively valued passions [e.g. happiness or pride], and the
        habitual avoidance of those linked with painful or negatively valued ones [e.g. sadness or
        shame]. (DeLanda, 2006a: 49; cf. DeLanda, 2011, where he explicitly embraces instrumental
        conditioning)                                        
       There is no discussion of how else something might derive value other than the pleasure/
       pain or happiness/sadness it brings, and DeLanda then cites Deleuze to the effect that this
       is reducible to ‘the principle of utility’.2 All this sounds mightily like utilitarianism
       backed by behaviourist principles, à la George Homans (1961). DeLanda does factor
       assemblage norms and ‘meta-norms’ into the picture as constraints on action, but mainly
       in terms of punishments and perceptions of punishment attached to deviant actions – thus
       repeating James Coleman (1990). We started with Deleuze and Hume but, via Weber,
       end with rational choice theory – a thin, fictional conception of human subjectivity and
       how it engages with the surrounding world conjured from afar rather than based on sus-
       tained in situ observation. To be sure, DeLanda (2006a: 24) does express reservations
       about rationality as a causal principle, but only because it supposedly isolates mental
       calculation from the formation of passions (via conditioning) and physical elements of
       the means-goal relation, which hardly does justice to sociological rational choice theory.
       Elsewhere, moreover, DeLanda (2011: ch. 8) happily resorts to game theory, with all its
       assumptions, to conceptualise elementary social relations.
       Relevant Assemblages for Sociology                    
       The limited gains of assemblage theory carry over to its purported applications for soci-
       ology. DeLanda (2006a, 2016a) works through a sequence of examples of social assem-
       blages, including everyday interactions or conversations, social networks, social
       movements, organisations/governments and cities and nations. In each case he identifies
       material and expressive components, forces of (de)territorialisation and (de)coding and
       so on. Smaller-scale assemblages fit into or become segments in larger-scale assem-
       blages, though DeLanda rejects any notion there are bounded ‘societies’, which includes
       discarding Deleuze and Guattari’s own concept of the ‘social field’. In all cases, how-
       ever, DeLanda effectively accepts yet redescribes, with little obvious payoff, the work of
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      84                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      other sociologists or historians on each of these domains: Goffman on interaction,
      Coleman on social networks, Charles Tilly on social movements, Weber plus Foucault on
      organisations and Braudel on cities and nations. Their own explanations, and even
      Weber’s typology of legitimacy, are not questioned but simply considered compatible
      with assemblage theory. One is reminded of Giddens (1984) translating Paul Willis’s
      (1977) research on educational inequality into the language of structuration theory with
      no obvious benefit to understanding the topic.         
        More generally, in fact, Giddens is brought to mind when reading DeLanda’s efforts
      to overcome the micro/macro, individualism/holism or agency/structure divides by ref-
      erence to constraints and enablements, unintended consequences and the virtuality of
      assemblages, which mirror the British theorist’s language on social structure. DeLanda
      (2006a) rejects structuration theory, however, on the basis that its notion of the ‘duality
      of structure’ – the idea that neither agency nor structure exists separate from one another
      – posits a seamless (Hegelian) whole, thus excluding relations of exteriority from con-
      sideration. This in turn, like the focus on emergence more generally, is reminiscent of
      Archer’s (1995) critique of Giddens’ ‘conflationism’ and her alternative morphogenetic
      approach, or perhaps Bhaskar’s (1998) transformational model of social life, both of
      which are based on a similar form of realism to DeLanda’s own.
        However, one thing DeLanda does that most of those he accommodates or echoes do
      not do is to push the issue of materiality. A bureaucratic assemblage is not just a structure
      or network of power between humans, mediated by symbols, but a system of walls,
      rooms, corridors, doors, etc., constraining and facilitating what people or other segments
      can do, including in relation to those walls, doors, etc. (e.g. removing them, making them
      transparent or open, and so on). A village is not just a mesh of human beings joined by
      mutual awareness, and related symbols of identity (e.g. the village name or icons), but a
      complex of specific buildings, roads, paths and so on structuring possibilities for spati-
      otemporal and symbolic activity. Science qua assemblage is not just a body of practition-
      ers but includes concepts and techniques and a collection of material entities – tools,
      equipment, laboratories, institutes – co-defining the space of possibilities or diagram. An
      army is not just a collection of soldiers but an assemblage of soldiers, specific technolo-
      gies (weapons, tools, etc.), animals (horses, dogs, etc.), techniques (strategies, tactics,
      etc.), symbols (flags, emblems, etc.) and so on.       
        Others have brought materiality into sociology or social thought before, from Marx
      on the forces of production through to Foucault on carceral/surveillance techniques,
      Giddens on time-space paths and Urry on spatial affordances and mobility systems, and,
      indeed, DeLanda seems to more or less accept the insights of Foucault and Giddens for
      assemblage theory with only slight modification – the counterbalance with Weber in
      Foucault’s case, and the counterbalance of deliberate choice (when relevant) against rou-
      tine in Giddens’ case. DeLanda differs, though, insofar as human, symbolic and material
      segments are treated with parity. Each possesses the same capacity for shaping the pos-
      sibilities of others. One can look at the way in which humans shape the material world,
      but also the way in which material entities shape human activity – really, one must do
      both at the same time. The point is, an assemblage is not merely a ‘social structure’ but a
      distinct nexus between all kinds of things, and all those things are treated as capable of
      affecting its co-constituents in the same ways. Changing military technologies, for

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       85     
                                                             
       instance, such as the development of rifles or portable radio transmitters, have operated
       to deterritorialise armies and change their capabilities – making them looser, open to
       greater initiative and flexibility and so on – with profound effects on battles, wars and
       geopolitical relations.                               
        Ascribing agency to material entities like this is not to ‘fetishize’ them – to obscure or
       mystify the relations of production or domination underlying them – as Vandenberghe
       (2002) worried of ANT. For sure, the posited effects of any material segment have been
       made possible by a chain of human interdependencies, struggles and interests. The
       agency of a type of rifle or a specific rifle, for example, implicates the interests of and
       struggles between weapons manufacturers and their nexus with suppliers, distributors
       and states. Yet those chains of interdependence can be identified as yet another assem-
       blage, with the rifle’s insertion into the different assemblages demonstrating its exterior-
       ity, and the rifle nonetheless bears capacities and properties in the military assemblage by
       virtue of its material form. The background human elements are not denied or suppressed
       but rather ‘bracketed out’, to use Giddens’ (1984) term, for explicative parsimony. Even
       the interdependencies lying behind the capacities and properties of a material entity,
       though, cannot be reduced to human beings but implicate the capacities and properties of
       other material entities, including, in our example, the properties, capacities and distribu-
       tion of the raw materials necessary for manufacturing rifles.
       The Critique of Bourdieu                              
       Having aired a degree of scepticism about assemblage theory while appreciating the
       focus on materiality, now we turn to DeLanda’s (2006a) critique of Bourdieu. Bourdieu,
       to remind readers, conceived the social world as comprised of so many fields structured
       by the distribution of multiple capitals understood as properties and possessions mis-
       recognised as inherently worthy or legitimate. Experiences associated with position and
       trajectory in a field shape actual and intuited possibilities and probabilities for activity
       within that field, specifically strategies for accumulating capital – striving for worth – or
       subverting the field, as well as a sense of what kinds of practices and activities are associ-
       ated with what sorts of positions. Those with a similar sense of possibilities/probabilities
       or ‘feel for the game’ by virtue of similar locations and experiences are said to have the
       same habitus (Bourdieu, 1977, 1990a). Science, law, religion, art and so on are examples
       of fields, but the class structure – or ‘social space’ – is the major field of a social order
       structured by economic, cultural and social capital (Bourdieu, 1984). Some of the lan-
       guage might seem similar to what we have seen so far: both Bourdieu and DeLanda talk
       about spaces of possibility, probabilistic causation, things being defined by their relation
       to others within a system, perceptual association and so on. Yet DeLanda rejects Bourdieu
       on two counts.                                        
       Habitus and Language                                  
       First, DeLanda rejects the concept of habitus for two reasons. One of these is the appar-
       ent automatism it implies: the lack of attention to conscious activity, intentional choice,
       articulated reasons and so on. This is an old charge that has been grappled with at length
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      86                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      elsewhere, shown to be a partial reading of the concept and avoidable if its phenomeno-
      logical heritage is emphasised (Atkinson, 2010). The other is Bourdieu’s supposed com-
      mitment to the neo-Kantian theory of linguistically constituted experience, which is also
      said to lack a theory of codification – the coding of assemblages – of the kind seen in
      Tilly’s work. This is based on a quotation from Bourdieu (1991: 105) in which he says
      that neo-Kantianism, which gives ‘specifically symbolic efficacy’ to language in ‘the
      construction of reality’, is ‘perfectly justified’.    
        However, the charge of linguistic reductivism is misplaced.3 Bourdieu was certainly
      interested in the power of words to construct and shape social reality, as part of his theory
      of symbolic power, classification struggles and ‘group making’ (see Bourdieu, 2018).
      That does not mean that all perception is mediated by language, however. He folded the
      linguistic element of experience within a broader vision of the structuring of perception
      according to schemata generated by practical experience. How many times did Bourdieu
      emphasise that dispositions to act and evaluative schemes exist below the level of verbal
      articulation? What matters for Bourdieu – and neo-Kantianism generally – is not just
      language but symbols, as perceptual stimuli representing, alluding to or ‘standing in’ for
      something else. Words are merely a special type of symbol, which for the sake of clarity
      I will call – after Piaget – signs. Both symbols and signs are furnished with their specific
      meaning through practical experience in the world. Emphasising the phenomenological
      lineage again, we note the genesis of symbolic meaning – with Husserl (1991) – via
      active (conscious) or passive (non-conscious) synthesis and its operation via horizons of
      experience and protention, i.e. pre-predicative association and expectation.4 A phenom-
      enological reading of Piaget furnishes evidence for the pre-linguistic genesis of associa-
      tive symbolic (and motor/affective) schemes upon which linguistic associations are later
      layered (Atkinson, 2016).                              
        Phenomenological synthesis is not the same as bare Humean associationism (or
      behaviourist conditioning), however, because Husserl, and later Schutz, emphasised the
      formation of mental or cognitive types via typification, i.e. the genesis of perceptual
      archetypes – which are not necessarily linguistic – for automatically classifying or cate-
      gorising specific stimuli which may nonetheless vary from and inform the archetype in
      specific ways. Such is the basis of object recognition and scene analysis. In fact, DeLanda
      (2011) himself moves in this direction when he acknowledges that simulations of neural
      networks – models of brain activity – demonstrate the incremental formation of overlap-
      ping archetypes from which new stimuli are perceived to vary in differing ways and
      extents. Integrating this insight with the general relationalism drawn from structuralism
      (but also Cassirer), Bourdieu would emphasise that any typification or classification is
      inherently co-defined by that which it is not – by its oppositions and contrasts, in other
      words, which in Bourdieu’s mind were structured by fields. Desire and affect also satu-
      rate typification because fields – including the family as a field – are the sources of
      human worth and purpose via the forms of (mis)recognition they bear (Bourdieu, 1990b,
      2000a; cf. Threadgold, 2020).                          
        Finally, it bears stating that Bourdieu did have an explicit theory of codification (see
      esp. Bourdieu, 1990b: 76–86). It is not exactly the same as DeLanda’s meaning, of course,
      but its purpose was to elucidate instances where specific ‘rules of the game’ and perceptual
      constructions of the world which are otherwise practically (non-linguistically) or even

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       87     
                                                             
       affectively/corporeally intuited are given formal, linguistic elaboration in the form of laws,
       official decrees, written records or formalised theories. This extends to the existence of
       groups or collectivities, as those invested with symbolic power declare the reality of spe-
       cific ‘groups’, ‘organisations’, ‘institutions’, ‘movements’ and so on (or even ‘communi-
       ties’, ‘cities’, etc.), fix their identities and boundaries in the minds of others – thus affecting
       their practice – and claim to represent, express or speak for them in some way (Bourdieu,
       1991, 2018). Incorporating the kind of ‘delegation’ of interest to Latour (2005) – scientists
       identifying and speaking in the name of ‘species’ or ‘elements’, for example – it becomes
       possible to extend the same logic to non-human entities too.
       Assemblage or/and Social Space                        
                                                             
       DeLanda’s second rejection is of Bourdieu’s conception of social structure, particularly
       his vision of class in terms of social space. This is in keeping with his rejection of Deleuze
       and Guattari’s notion of the social field, which seemingly covers similar ground. The
       substance of DeLanda’s (2006a: 63) critique, moving away from his earlier crude sug-
       gestion that classes are strata, is that the distribution of resources – or capitals – does not
       exist in an abstract space but is only ever embedded in concrete networks of people or
       organisations. This critique is, in fact, very similar to that raised by social network theo-
       rists, such as Becker (2006) and Crossley (2011, 2022), who prefer the notion of ‘world’
       instead, though DeLanda emphasises the organisational and material aspects to a greater
       degree – i.e. resource distributions are not only dependent on connections or ties between
       people but between people, organisations and material entities. One can thus respond in
       a similar way (cf. Atkinson, 2020): put simply, networks/assemblages and fields/social
       spaces need not be mutually exclusive.                
        The utility of the concept of field or social space is to document the basic cartography
       of possibilities and probabilities in relation to a specific set of stakes: possession of a
       certain stock of capital shapes what is objectively possible, probable and desirable for
       people in their struggle for capital and the sense of the possible, probable and desirable,
       as well as the sense of what is possible or probable for others – grasped (via typification)
       at varying levels of anonymity and abstraction – in the field. These possibilities and
       intuitions unite individuals who are far removed from one another in terms of network
       linkages, generate similar practices and even inform the formation of networks (Lizardo,
       2006). This has been empirically verified often enough. That does not mean networks do
       not exist or are inconsequential. Bourdieu (1996, 2000a) himself talked about ‘legitima-
       tion chains’ to convey the interpersonal chains of command and delegation through
       which symbolic power, as control over capital, operates, his major point, echoing Norbert
       Elias, being that the lengthier the chains become the more impersonal and stable becomes
       the symbolic power to the perceiver. More generally, though, the distribution of resources
       does indeed depend on specific networks and circuits of people and activity, and agents
       form their practical sense and discursive construction of the field in good part – but not
       exclusively5 – through interaction with concrete others, meaning those similarly posi-
       tioned in the field can have different interpretations of the field and their place within it
       with ramifications for their practice and even variant structures of possibility. As Crossley
       (2013; Bottero and Crossley, 2011; cf. Lahire, 2012) has noted in his more conciliatory
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      88                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      moments, the relationship between fields and networks is best understood in terms of a
      dialectical interplay, though I would add: with the sense of the game (and one’s place)
      and investment in the game, both oriented toward field structures, taking explanatory
      priority.6 Worlds can thus be reconceived as cross-field networks and circuits oriented
      around specific domains. The military world in a nation, for example, would encompass
      agents across the state (the bureaucratic field) and the military field strictu senso (army
      personnel) as well as arms and supplies manufacturers (in the economic field), each with
      their own interests relative to their fields. Some of these fields and circuits will be trans-
      national, others national. There is even evidence to suggest Bourdieu himself sometimes
      worked with this notion of worlds without naming them as such (Atkinson, 2020).
        The same logic can be expanded to assemblages incorporating material entities. Thus
      we flesh out the human interests and relations underpinning the production, distribution,
      accumulation, interpretation and uses of specific material entities within discrete assem-
      blages, as Vandenberghe (2002) suggests, but we also acknowledge the effect of material
      entities within specific assemblages on field structures and possibilities. The military
      assemblage encompasses the military world just mentioned, but also highlights the (im)
      possibilities generated by the capacities and properties of associated technologies or non-
      human animals insofar as they are ‘re-structured’ – as Bourdieu would have it (Bourdieu
      and Wacquant, 1992: 105) – into the logic and strategies of component fields (cf.
      Dominguez-Rubio and Silva, 2013). More broadly, the capitals defining a social space
      – especially economic capital and cultural capital – are actualised in material entities
      (coins, certificates, computer networks) embedded in assemblages of production and
      distribution, and their durability, size, weight, etc – made possible by the capacities and
      properties of their own material segments – make some strategies of accumulation or
      conversion possible and more or less viable both objectively and subjectively. Alchemy,
      for example, is impossible; forgery has only a chance of success depending on its method;
      paper money is easier to store and transfer than metal money, but not as easy to store and
      transfer as digital money (which also opens up possibilities for hacking); and so on. Still,
      the very drive to accumulate or convert the material manifestations of capital unites all
      agents within a social order and across numerous assemblages, and the sense of one’s
      place is attuned to intuition, however fuzzy, of the topological distribution of capitals
      beyond the networks and assemblages in which one is directly embedded. The very pro-
      duction and distribution of materials perceived as capitals are also linked to the state’s
      interest in accumulating or maintaining control over capital within a territory, docu-
      mented by Bourdieu (2014), which is also, of course, affected by the properties and
      capacities of those materials.                         
        Part of what is at stake here are what can be called – extending on legitimation chains
      – circuits of symbolic power, or the movements over time-space and between fields of
      specific people, symbols and material entities. A material entity – a singular artwork, a
      rifle or a standardised consumer commodity – may be produced via the struggles and
      strategies in one field, though also dependent on the properties and capacities of its con-
      stituent materials. It is then disseminated over time-space in accordance with the sym-
      bolic power of their producers and their connections within worlds, thence having a
      specific effect on what an agent or set of agents can and cannot do with consequences for
      their activity within a different field by virtue of its capacities and properties. This may

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       89     
                                                             
       take the form of catalysing specific symbolic revolutions or other major events within
       fields, or constitute feedback loops for the original field of production, and they may
       even operate to (de/re)territorialise specific assemblages or underpin codification or
       ‘group-making’ efforts. Such is the ‘social life of things’, to quote Appadurai (1988), but
       also the material life of the social.                 
                                                             
       Plurality, Exteriority and Relational Phenomenology   
       In responding to DeLanda’s critique, then, I have discarded his associationist-utilitarian-
       behaviourist model of human agency in favour of the phenomenological habitus but also,
       rather than reject the notion of assemblage outright, considered ways in which fields and
       assemblages may co-exist and affect one another. There are other ways in which
       DeLanda’s vocabulary may enrich field theory, however. One of these, implicit in the
       foregoing, is the concept of exteriority, which emphasises when the capacities and prop-
       erties of an entity are irreducible to its insertion within an assemblage – and, we might
       now add, a field. In a social universe defined by a multitude of fields, the interpretations,
       uses and capacities of a single material entity vary substantially across fields. What a
       single rifle makes possible or impossible is very different in the economic field com-
       pared to the military field, the armed clash of state armies, and a familial field (where it
       may be a cherished heirloom, for instance).           
        The same applies to human beings. Bernard Lahire (e.g. Lahire, 2011, 2012, 2015)
       has long criticised Bourdieu for confining individuals to single fields, reducing them to
       ‘beings-in-a-field’ and nothing more, thus missing the full complexity and plurality of
       individual lives lived and dispositions forged across myriad contexts. There is some truth
       to that charge, or at least, as is now being increasingly recognised, a need to think about
       how to bring plurality into field theory – how, that is, individuals may be positioned
       within multiple fields (Atkinson, 2016; Schmitz et al., 2017). The notion of exteriority,
       then, serves to underscore, on the one hand, that an individual and their capacities, prop-
       erties and activity are irreducible to a single field, and have some relative autonomy from
       it, by virtue of their being inserted within other fields too, as well as within networks and
       assemblages; but also, on the other hand, that what goes on in a field is not entirely
       reducible to the structure of the field, as ‘outside forces’, like an individual’s family com-
       mitments or the material structures and limitations of their village life, play their part.7
       As DeLanda stresses, however, this is a scalar phenomenon: the degree to which an
       individual is defined by a singular field, and to which they are homogeneous in relation
       to others in the same field, can vary and surely has varied over history (cf. Lahire, 2011).
       There may be just one localised field in small-scale undifferentiated social orders, where
       members are relatively homogeneous, yet multiple field membership in others and great
       social dispersion within those fields. Bourdieu (e.g. 1990b: 73–4) himself recognised
       this, in fact, but never made anything of it. And then, of course, there is the isolated indi-
       vidual, like the Brazilian ‘Man of the Hole’, who appears to be an agent in no field but
       who still exists within assemblages of matter and whose material environment may still
       be shaped by circuits of symbolic power originating far away (e.g. state protection of his
       territory).                                           
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      90                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
        Individuals and fields, then, are both objects equally amenable to social scientific
      construction; fields are comprised of individuals whose relations of mutual recognition
      generate emergent properties – structures, strategies, doxa, etc. – without being entirely
      reducible to those individuals or those individuals being reducible to it; and each human
      individual and each field are historically unique entities in the same way as assemblages
      are.8 Whether or not that makes for a ‘flat ontology’ is a moot point. However, DeLanda’s
      use of exteriority to reject the Hegelian part-whole logic, which ultimately underpins
      both the structuralist version of relationalism adopted by Bourdieu and the interactionist
      relationalism of social network theory (and which I have tried to bring together in a ‘uni-
      fied relationalism’), is problematic. This is because it can always be retorted that the
      present possibilities of any singular entity are defined by its combination of assemblage
      insertions; it is, in other words, defined by the totality of its assemblage participations
      and the relations between those participations.        
        In the case of human individuals, for instance, they may be irreducible to single fields,
      but their singularity can still be understood in terms of their specific locations in multiple
      fields and circuits of symbolic power and the relations between those field/circuit loca-
      tions in everyday life. Bourdieu (2000b), in fact, seemed to recognise this when he pos-
      ited a term for grasping an individual’s existence – their perceptions and dispositions
      – across multiple fields: their ‘social surface’. This can be interpreted as a kind of ‘meta-
      habitus’ and, using tools from phenomenology, it becomes possible to conceptualise the
      relations between fields and circuits within individual lifeworlds. Within any percept, for
      example, there may be loaded horizonal significance related to any one field in which the
      individual participates, but also significance related to how activity in one field/circuit
      bears on another – what becomes (im)possible or (un)desirable in one field by virtue of
      events in another. More generally, the individual’s sense of self – of what matters to them
      and the hierarchy of those values – is constructed out of the fuzzy sense of plurality and
      circuit embeddedness, each intuited in relation to one another, whether that means they
      feel themselves fully integrated, neatly compartmentalised or ‘conflicted’ and ‘internally
      torn’. And, of course, different fields will structure the time and space of lifeworlds, and
      streams of consciousness, to different extents, with some (e.g. ‘greedy fields’ related to
      employment) demanding attention and structuring time-space paths more than others.
        Here we can return to DeLanda (2006a), who, in offering a ‘charitable’ reading of
      habitus in his endnotes, suggests it might be reconstrued as an individual’s ‘internal pos-
      sibility space’ provided by their assemblage of beliefs, habits and skills. That is, in fact,
      a perfectly reasonable reading of the habitus, so long as we specify those beliefs and
      habits in phenomenological terms as expectations of the forthcoming, co-given with pre-
      sent perception, structured by pre-predicative typifications and soliciting associated
      activity. Elsewhere it has even been suggested that the habitus constitutes a sort of ‘sub-
      jective field of possibles’, i.e. a set of more or less doable, thinkable and conceivable
      practices and activities (beyond which lies the impossible, unthinkable, inconceivable or
      fantastical), attuned to the objective field of possibilities provided by position within a
      field or social space as it manifests in everyday experience (Atkinson, 2010). Now, how-
      ever, we add in the structuration of perception by attunement to the possibilities and
      probabilities of multiple fields, awareness of their interrelation (how events and activity
      in one field will likely impact upon another, or are relevant to more than one field)

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       91     
                                                             
       – which we might call the ‘lifeworld horizon’9 – and the different strengths of desire for
       their respective stakes.                              
        The result is a relational conceptualisation of the social surface: it is a (virtual) space
       of possibilities and probabilities of thought and action structured according to relations
       within fields but also the relations between fields as defined by spatiotemporal extension
       within the lifeworld, degrees of mutual interpenetration and strength of desire. It is in
       constant process, structured by time in the double sense of not just sedimentation of past
       experience and adjustment to the future but (bounded) flux in relation to the durée of
       everyday life and the ‘situations’ it encompasses. This is no metaphysical abstraction; the
       relational social surface or meta-habitus is an explanatory tool for making sense of
       observed events and practices – for comprehending why someone did something, or why
       they reacted the way they did to a situation or experience, whether its consequences are
       part of an ongoing feedback loop into myriad fields, a (de)coding or (de)territorialisation
       of an assemblage or ‘group’ or a catalyst for a thoroughgoing multi-field symbolic revo-
       lution. It can only ever be reconstructed by the analyst, but limning the relational struc-
       ture of the internal possibility space, defined by spatiotemporal attention and intensity of
       desire directed towards fields, with all their solicitations, should facilitate a more refined
       sense of the conditions of possibility or likelihood of certain practices and affective
       states.                                               
       Conclusion                                            
       My intention was to put field theory and DeLanda’s assemblage theory into dialogue.
       There is no disguising the fact that field theory was the starting point, and its founda-
       tional premises regarding human beings – the quest for value, misrecognition and sym-
       bol/sign manipulation – the ultimate anchors. An easy reaction to DeLanda’s critique of
       Bourdieu would have been simply to dismiss it and assemblage theory altogether. And
       sure enough, there is much in DeLanda’s theorising that seems to be flawed or unorigi-
       nal, especially the default to utilitarianism backed by behaviourism. Yet DeLanda’s ren-
       dering of assemblage theory does bring fruitful insights to the table which should be
       taken seriously. It offers an opportunity to push field theory in novel directions, there-
       fore, and develop new tools for the task of explaining social life.
        The outcome of the dialogue can be summarised as follows. First, the causal power of
       ‘the material’ must be acknowledged; it has its own irreducible effect on fields; there
       exist distinct assemblages of material and non-material entities; these may even be use-
       fully described as more or less (de)territorialised. Yet that does not preclude the existence
       of fields as trans-assemblage structures of capital structuring subjectivity and agency.
       Better to examine the interplay of fields and assemblages, and networks generally, via
       circuits of symbolic power. The desires and sense of possibilities related to fields may be
       the primary principle of practice, but they are co-conditioned and modified or individu-
       ated by the (sense of) im/possibilities furnished specifically by networks and assem-
       blages. Second, the concept of exteriority gainfully underscores the plurality of
       positioning, and identity, of material objects and human individuals, all of which can
       exist in multiple fields, networks and assemblages while retaining relative autonomy
       from each, though DeLanda’s posited escape from relational logic is doubtful. Finally,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      92                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      exteriority qua plurality has consequences for rethinking subjectivity as an internal pos-
      sibility space, bringing a new layer of relationalism – beyond that provided by adaptation
      to a single field – to the phenomenology of experience and practice.
        It might be supposed that the human/post-human or anthropocentric/ecocentric
      divides are new oppositions within social theory, opened up by Deleuze and the new
      materialism, to match the old ones of micro/macro and structure/agency. Perhaps the
      effort here could be considered a step toward reconciling, overcoming or at least ques-
      tioning those oppositions insofar as I have tried to make field theory less ‘human only’
      while recognising the specificity of human beings, including their tendency to form
      fields of mutual recognition and struggle. More important, though, is the possibility of
      providing new ways of conceiving the relation between material life and human life, and
      the structures of perception, that may prove useful for sociological explanation – for
      making sense of why such-and-such event or practice occurred, for example, when refer-
      ence to the structure and forces of a single field or social space seems not to be enough.
      ORCID iD                                               
      Will Atkinson https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1032-1241    
      Notes                                                  
                                                             
      1. Thus for each assemblage there may be any number of possibilities, or outcomes, that can
        feasibly happen, but observation of an assemblage, with all its interactions, determines that
        some outcomes are more or less likely than others, often statable numerically or statistically
        (e.g. 20% probability, 60% probability, etc.). In this DeLanda explicitly makes common cause
        with Weber.                                          
      2. The only other possible motivating force for human activity in DeLanda’s Humean account of
        agency is habit and an associated quest to maintain the stability of personal identity – an idea
        echoing Giddens’ (1984) appeal to ‘ontological security’ and leading to the same psychologi-
        cal reductivism (Atkinson, 2007).                    
      3. One also wonders whether DeLanda’s own emphasis on propositional beliefs and reasons as
        explanations for human action does not also depend on a linguistic conception of experience.
        Certainly it seems to unjustifiably exclude or downplay sensation and affect (Clough et al.,
        2007).                                               
      4. This phenomenological account of experience is complemented by a neurological account of
        experience emphasising the formation, strengthening and activation of synaptic connections.
      5. It may also come, for example, from reading books, journals, magazines, news reports, etc.
      6. This point can be pursued and demonstrated in empirical research. See, e.g., De Nooy (2003)
        and Basov (2022).                                    
      7. This argument counters Fox and Alldred’s (2017) explicit rejection of class as a concept
        by appeal to exteriority: it is possible to conceive of individual diversity and specificity via
        multiplicity but retain the notion of class as a practical means of describing relative similarity
        within one field (the social space), as indeed even they seem to do when referring to the ‘class
        mix’ of neighbourhoods (p. 68).                      
      8. It might be argued that ‘field’ is a class of entity, thus violating DeLanda’s postulate of singu-
        larity, but it is no more such than assemblages are. A field’s emergent properties can be con-
        sidered as ‘parametrisable’ (or scalar) as those of an assemblage; even the degree of struggle
        and heterogeneity is variable, the limit case of homogeneity being the ‘apparatus’ or ‘corps’
        (Atkinson, 2020).                                    

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Atkinson                                       93     
                                                             
       9. Previously I have suggested Husserl’s term ‘world horizon’ for this, but since that already
         has a useful meaning (pre-predicative awareness of there being a world beyond immediate
         perception), changing it to lifeworld horizon has the benefit of retaining that meaning while
         also being more precise in its coverage, i.e. awareness of the interplay of fields defining one’s
         lifeworld.                                          
       References                                            
       Adkins, Lisa (2013) Ontological Bourdieu? Social Epistemology 27(3–4): 295–301.
       Anderson, Ben, Kearnes, Matthew, McFarlane, Colin, et al. (2012) On assemblages and geogra-
         phy. Dialogues in Human Geography 2(2): 171–189.    
       Appadurai, Arjun (ed.) (1988) The Social Life of Things. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Archer, Margaret (1995) Realist Social Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Atkinson, Will (2007) Anthony Giddens as adversary of class analysis. Sociology 41(3): 533–549.
       Atkinson, Will (2010) Class, Individualization and Late Modernity. Basingstoke: Palgrave
         Macmillan.                                          
       Atkinson, Will (2016) Beyond Bourdieu. Cambridge: Polity.
       Atkinson, Will (2020) Bourdieu and After. London: Routledge.
       Basov, Nikita (2022) The ambivalence of cultural homophily. Poetics 78: 101353.
       Becker, Howard (2006) Art Worlds, 2nd edn. Berkeley: University of California Press.
       Bennett, Jane (2010) Vibrant Matter. Durham: Duke University Press.
       Bhaskar, Roy (1998) The Possibility of Naturalism, 3rd edn. London: Routledge.
       Bhaskar, Roy (2008) A Realist Theory of Science, 2nd edn. London: Verso.
       Bottero, Wendy and Crossley, Nick (2011) Worlds, fields and networks. Cultural Sociology 5(1):
         99–119.                                             
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1984) Distinction. London: Routledge.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1990a) The Logic of Practice. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1990b) In Other Words. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre and Wacquant, Loic (1992) An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology. Cambridge:
         Polity.                                             
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1996) The State Nobility. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (2000a) Pascalian Meditations. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (2000b) The biographical illusion. In: du Gay, Paul, Evans, Jessica and Redman,
         Peter (eds) Identity. London: SAGE, pp. 297–303.    
       Bourdieu, Pierre (2014) On the State. Cambridge: Polity.
       Bourdieu, Pierre (2018) Classification Struggles. Cambridge: Polity.
       Buchanan, Ian (2020) Assemblage Theory and Method. London: Bloomsbury.
       Clough, Patricia, Han, Sam and Schiff, Rachel (2007) Review of A New Philosophy of Society.
         Theory, Culture & Society 24(7–8): 387–393.         
       Coleman, James S. (1990) Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
       Collins, Harry and Yearley, Steven (1992) Epistemological chicken. In: Pickering, Alan (ed.)
         Science and Practice and Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 301–326.
       Conway, Jay (2022) Deleuze, Guattari and the concept of social assemblage. In: Delanty, Gerard
         and Turner, Stephen (eds) Routledge International Handbook of Contemporary Social and
         Political Theory, 2nd edn. London: Routledge, pp. 232–240.
       Crossley, Nick (2011) Towards Relational Sociology. London: Routledge.

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      94                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Crossley, Nick (2013) Interactions, juxtapositions and tastes. In: Powell, Christopher and
        Dépelteau, Francois (eds) Conceptualising Relational Sociology. Basingstoke: Palgrave
        Macmillan, pp. 123–143.                              
      Crossley, Nick (2022) A dependent structure of interdependence. Sociology 56(1): 166–182.
      De Nooy, Wouter (2003) Fields and networks. Poetics 31(5–6): 305–327.
      DeLanda, Manuel (1997) A Thousand Years of Nonlinear History. New York, NY: Zone Books.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2005) Beyond the problematic of legitimacy. boundary 2 32(1): 117–128.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2006a) A New Philosophy of Society. London: Continuum.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2006b) Deleuzian social ontology and assemblage theory. In: Fulsgang, Martin
        and Sørenson, Bent Meier (eds) Deleuze and the Social. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
        Press, pp. 250–266.                                  
      DeLanda, Manuel (2008) Deleuze, materialism and politics. In: Buchanan, Ian and Thoburn,
        Nicholas (eds) Deleuze and Politics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 160–177.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2009) Molar entities and molecular populations in human history. In: Bell,
        Jeffrey and Colebrook, Claire (eds) Deleuze and History. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
        Press, pp. 225–236.                                  
      DeLanda, Manuel (2011) Philosophy and Simulation. London: Continuum.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2016a) Assemblage Theory. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
      DeLanda, Manuel (2016b) Parametrising the social. Architectural Design 86(2): 124–127.
      Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (1984) Anti-Oedipus. London: Athlone Press.
      Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (1988) A Thousand Plateaus. London: Athlone Press.
      Dominguez-Rubio, Fernando and Silva, Elizabeth B. (2013) Materials in the field. Cultural
        Sociology 7(2): 161–178.                             
      Elliot, Antony and Urry, Jon (2010) Mobile Lives. London: Routledge.
      Fox, Nick J. and Alldred, Pam (2017) Sociology and the New Materialism. London: SAGE.
      Giddens, Anthony (1984) The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Homans, George (1961) Social Behaviour. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace and World.
      Husserl, Edmund (1991) Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
      Lahire, Bernard (2011) The Plural Actor. Cambridge: Polity.
      Lahire, Bernard (2012) Monde Pluriel. Paris: Seuil.    
      Lahire, Bernard (2015) The limits of the field. In: Hilgers, Mathieu and Mangez, Eric (eds) Bourdieu’s
        Theory of Social Fields. London: Routledge, pp. 62–101.
      Latour, Bruno (2005) Reassembling the Social. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Lizardo, Omar (2006) How cultural tastes shape personal networks. American Sociological Review
        71(5): 778–807.                                      
      Marcus, George and Saka, Erkan (2006) Assemblage. Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3): 101–
        106.                                                 
      Pels, Dick (1995) Have we never been modern? History of the Human Sciences 8(3): 129–141.
      Schmitz, Andreas, Witte, Daniel and Gengnagel, Vincent (2017) Pluralizing field analysis. Social
        Science Information 56(1): 49–73.                    
      Threadgold, Steven (2020) Bourdieu and Affect. Bristol: Policy Press.
      Thrift, Nigel (2008) Non-Representational Theory. London: Routledge.
      Vandenberghe, Frèdèric (2002) Reconstructing humants. Theory, Culture & Society 19(5–6):
        51–67.                                               
      Venn, Couze (2006) A note on assemblage. Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3): 107–108.
      Willis, Paul (1977) Learning to Labour. Farnborough: Saxon House.
      Will Atkinson is Professor of Sociology in the School of Sociology, Politics and International
      Studies at the University of Bristol, UK. His publications include Beyond Bourdieu (Polity Press,
      2016) and Bourdieu and After (Routledge, 2020).        