[PAGE 1]
 1162027                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764231162027Theory, Culture & SocietyBaier
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Narratives of Post-Truth:              2024, Vol. 41(1) 95 –110
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Lyotard and  the Epistemic                            
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462432131116622002277
       Fragmentation   of Society                            
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Christian Baier                                       
       Seoul National University                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       In recent years, the post-truth phenomenon has dominated public and political
       discourse. This article offers a functional analysis of its mechanisms based on the
       category of narrative. After providing a brief definition of post-truth as a conceptual
       foundation, I trace the meaning of the term ‘narrative’ in the works of Jean-François
       Lyotard, focusing on the elusive category of small narrative. Utilizing terms and concepts
       of contemporary narrative theory, I propose a general definition of cultural narrative
       and reconceptualize Lyotard’s petit récit as a particular case of this superordinate
       category. Drawing on Lyotard’s phrase linguistics as set out in The Differend, I develop
       the category of epistemic sphere to analyze Donald Trump’s MAGA movement as an
       example of post-truth politics, the rise of populism and the epistemic fragmentation
       of society.                                           
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       cultural narrative, Jean-François Lyotard, petit récit, populism, post-truth, Donald
       Trump                                                 
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       In 2023, post-truth is everywhere: it manifests in the persisting influence of Trumpism in
       the United States, was brought into sharp focus by the Coronavirus pandemic and is
       discussed among politicians, journalists and scholars alike (see Baggini, 2017; D’Ancona,
       2017; McIntyre, 2018). Originally coined by Serbian-American playwright Steve Tesich
       in 1992, the term gained popularity in the wake of Donald Trump’s presidential cam-
       paign. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) famously named ‘post-truth’ its word of
       the year for 2016, defining it as ‘relating to or denoting circumstances in which objective
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Christian Baier. Email: cbaier@snu.ac.kr
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      96                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      facts are less influential in shaping political debate or public opinion than appeals to
      emotion and personal belief’ (OED, 2017). Since then, the definition has been refined by
      scholars like Brahms (2020: 17–18) and Bufacchi (2021: 350).
        Within the context of this article, post-truth is understood to combine the preference
      for emotional appeal over rational argument with a profound mistrust towards the institu-
      tions traditionally tasked to generate, evaluate and communicate knowledge, that is, uni-
      versities, media and experts, creating a state of tribal epistemology (Roberts, 2017): an
      environment in which the truthfulness of a statement ‘is evaluated based not on conform-
      ity to common standards of evidence or correspondence to a common understanding of
      the world, but on whether it supports the tribe’s values and goals and is vouchsafed by
      tribal leaders’. Far from denying the existence of truth or facts, proponents of post-truth
      reject only the idea of universal truth in favor of a multiplicity of individual truths. The
      resulting epistemic fragmentation of society has to be considered a fundamental feature
      of the post-truth environment. Analyzing its structure and mechanisms is the main goal
      of this article.                                       
        The breakdown of the epistemic foundation of society into a number of epistemic
      spheres is strongly reminiscent of Jean-François Lyotard’s description of the postmod-
      ern condition: of grand narratives losing their discursive dominance and ability to legiti-
      mize knowledge while disintegrating into a multitude of smaller counter-narratives.
      Based on this observation, the article uses Lyotard’s elusive category of petit récit to
      develop a functional definition of the post-truth phenomenon,1 conceptualizing it in
      terms of narrative. This approach, however, has to contend with Lyotard’s inconsistent
      use of the term ‘narrative’: in texts like ‘Apostil on Narratives’ (1984, in Lyotard, 1992),
      he treats narratives as stories, while in The Differend (1988), he conceptualizes narra-
      tive both as a ‘phrase regimen’ and a ‘genre of discourse’. Due to these inconsistencies,
      the concept can hardly be considered a well-defined category, making it difficult to
      apply to a phenomenon like post-truth. In a first step, I therefore trace the use of the
      term ‘narrative’ within Lyotard’s work to determine its meaning and specify its
      limitations.                                           
        In order to conceptualize Lyotard’s petit récit in a way which will allow me to
      explore the post-truth phenomenon, I then use contemporary narrative theory to
      develop a definition of non-textual or cultural narrative. This approach will enable me
      to define petits récits as a particular type of cultural narrative, simultaneously address-
      ing the terminological inconsistency within Lyotard’s thought and making the concept
      more compatible with general scholarship. Since the discipline of narratology almost
      exclusively focuses on textual narratives, introducing a comprehensive definition of
      cultural narrative also closes a gap in the center of contemporary narratological theory
      by specifying one of the most notoriously vague terms in current academic and popular
      discourse.                                             
        Combining the redefined petit récit with Lyotard’s model of phrase linguistics as set
      forth in The Differend allows me to develop the concept of epistemic sphere, which I
      apply to Donald Trump’s MAGA (Make America Great Again) movement. Situating this
      prominent case of post-truth politics within the broader context of contemporary pop-
      ulism, I use it to illustrate the narrative mechanisms of post-truth and the resulting epis-
      temic fragmentation of society.                        

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                          97     
                                                             
       Lyotard on Narrative                                  
       Outside of specialized scholarship, Jean-François Lyotard is most famous for his concept
       of grand récit: a term describing overarching narrative structures that ‘legitimat[e] social
       and political institutions and practices, laws, ethics, ways of thinking’ (Lyotard, 1992:
       18). In his essay The Postmodern Condition (1979), Lyotard considers ‘incredulity
       toward metanarratives’ (Lyotard, 1999 [1979]: xxiv) the defining feature of the postmod-
       ern, since the sweeping stories of enlightenment, progress and the emancipation of
       humanity have lost much of their credibility. Even in postmodern societies, however,
       grand narratives continue to exist, exerting a somewhat reduced influence, and their
       decline does not ‘stop countless other stories [. . .] from continuing to weave the fabric
       of everyday life’ (Lyotard, 1992: 19). ‘Because they are short, because they are not
       extracts from some great history, and because they are difficult to fit in any great history’
       (Lyotard, 1989: 132), Lyotard calls these stories petits récits.
        Small narratives manifest as ‘networks of uncertain and ephemeral stories [that] can
       gnaw away at the great institutionalized narrative apparatuses’ (Lyotard, 1989: 132).
       Where grand narratives aim to establish discursive hegemony, marginalizing minorities
       and their divergent stories in the process, small narratives resist incorporation into the
       dominant discourse. Their claim to validity is local and transient rather than universal
       and enduring, and instead of a fixed long-term identity, they emerge, adapt and dissipate
       as needed to address a specific injustice: as counter-narratives that challenge the hegem-
       onic discourse of the grand narrative, petits récits are inherently subversive and therefore
       unsuitable to assume hegemonic power (see Purvis, 2011; Readings, 1991: 47–51; Sim,
       2020: 22–6 and 136–46).                               
        In ‘Apostil on Narratives’, Lyotard (1992) cites the proverbs ‘Like father, like son’
       and ‘To a miserly father, a prodigal son’ (p. 20) as examples of small narratives.
       Separately, these adages contribute little to clarify his understanding of the category,
       since neither exhibits the features attributed to petits récits or even fulfils the most basic
       requirements of a story. In conjunction, however, Lyotard (1992: 20) uses them to illus-
       trate a relevant feature of small narratives, here referred to as ‘people’s prose’: the ability
       to ‘say [. . .] one thing and its opposite’ – a quality instrumental in the description of
       post-truth. The passage in question even provides further insight into Lyotard’s (1992:
       19) idea of narrative: while admitting having ‘exaggerated the importance to be given to
       the narrative genre’ in The Postmodern Condition, he asserts ‘a sort of sovereignty of
       minor narratives that allows them to escape the crisis of delegitimation’ (Lyotard, 1992:
       20). Besides adding another feature to the concept of petit récit, the reference to a ‘nar-
       rative genre’ indicates the necessity to situate Lyotard’s concept of narrative within the
       context of his phrase linguistics.                    
        In The Differend (1988), Jean-François Lyotard develops a pragmatic model of phrase
       linguistics (see Bennington, 1988: 117–41), wherein a phrase is more than a linguistic
       structure: ‘[a] wink, a shrugging of the shoulder, a tap[p]ing of the foot, a fleeting blush,
       or an attack of tachycardia can be phrases’ (Lyotard, 1988: 70), as can silence (Lyotard,
       1988: xii) or a cat raising its tail (Lyotard, 1988: 76–7). Phrases are linked to one another
       according to specific rules or phrase regimens that may be, among others, descriptive,
       prescriptive, interrogative, ostensive or narrative. And while phrase regimes are
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      98                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      irreducible in the sense that ‘[p]hrases from heterogeneous regimens cannot be translated
      from one into the other’ (Lyotard, 1988: xii), they are linked together by genres of dis-
      course that ‘submit phrases from different regimens to a single finality: the question, the
      example, the argument, the narration, the exclamation are in forensic rhetoric the hetero-
      geneous means of persuading’ (Lyotard, 1988: 29). In this example, ‘question,’ ‘narra-
      tion’ and ‘exclamation’ are phrase regimens, while ‘forensic rhetoric’ constitutes a genre
      of discourse. Other discursive genres include dialogue, speculative dialectics, science,
      philosophy, and narrative. Within the works of Lyotard, narrative is therefore categorized
      both as a phrase regimen (see Lyotard, 1988: 42 and 76) and a genre of discourse (see
      Lyotard, 1988: 151 and 158, 1989: 314, 1992: 19–20), and occasionally even accorded
      the power of ‘encompass[ing] the multiplicity of families of sentences and of possible
      discursive genres’ (Lyotard, 1989: 321).               
        At first glance, it might seem a mere technicality whether Jean-François Lyotard con-
      ceives of narrative as a phrase regimen, a discursive genre or something else entirely.
      However, this terminological imprecision causes a conceptual conflation not without
      consequence. This is most evident in The Postmodern Condition, where the breakdown
      of grand narratives does not result in multitudes of small narratives, but rather in ‘flexi-
      ble networks of language games’ (Lyotard, 1999 [1979]: 43), implying a functional
      equivalence between these two categories widely accepted within Lyotard scholarship
      (see Jones, 2014: 140; Schalkwyk, 1997: 129; Smith, 2011: 185). The equivalence is
      legitimized by Lyotard conceptualizing both narratives and language games as phrase
      regimens (Lyotard, 1999 [1979]: 46, 1988: xiii), disregarding their structural differences.
      In order to highlight the problematic nature of this equivalence, I will briefly summarize
      Ludwig Wittgenstein’s concept of language game.        
        In his Philosophical Investigations (1953), Ludwig Wittgenstein develops ‘a picture
      of language as a set of instruments or techniques that are employed by speakers in the
      course of their everyday lives’ (McGinn, 1997: 49), emphasizing ‘the fact that the speak-
      ing of language is part of an activity, or of a form of life’ (Wittgenstein, 2009 [1953]:
      §23; see also Hertzberg, 2014; Sluga, 2011: 57–75).2 In Wittgenstein’s understanding,
      the meaning of a word is determined not by reference to an object or concept, but by its
      use in communicative action (see Wittgenstein, 2009 [1953]: §1). The game metaphor
      has a number of relevant implications: the use of language is governed by a specific set
      of rules; these rules not only differ between language games, but are also subject to
      change; and what is considered a permissible ‘move’ or a correct statement is contingent
      on the particular communicative situation (see Wittgenstein, 2009 [1953]: §133; see also
      Hertzberg, 2014: 45; McGinn, 1997: 66). The examples of language games enumerated
      in Investigations §23 include ‘[c]onstructing an object from a description’, ‘[f]orming
      and testing a hypothesis’, ‘[m]aking up a story; and reading one’, ‘[a]cting in a play’ and
      ‘[s]olving a problem in applied arithmetic’. Although a detailed definition of narrative
      will only be provided in the subsequent section, it is obvious that only one of these exam-
      ples can be considered a narrative.                    
        While narratives and language games might be functionally equivalent within
      Lyotard’s phrase linguistics, the two entities are fundamentally different by any external
      standard. This discrepancy, together with the inconsistent classification as both a phrase
      regimen and a genre of discourse, make it difficult to consider Lyotard’s concept of

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                          99     
                                                             
       narrative a well-defined category that could successfully be applied to the post-truth
       phenomenon. In order to address this problem, the next section will first establish a
       definition of textual narrative as a point of reference and, in a second step, propose a
       general concept of cultural narrative. The newly developed category will then be used
       to redefine the term petit récit, which will not only make Lyotard’s concept of narrative
       more compatible with general scholarship, but also address an imbalance within the
       discipline of narratology and provide the analytical tool for the subsequent exploration
       of post-truth.                                        
       From Textual to Cultural Narrative                    
                                                             
       Narratology can be defined as the scholarly discipline ‘dedicated to the study of the
       logic, principles, and practices of narrative representation’ (Meister, 2014: 623) – that is:
       the study of narrative. In classical narratology the term ‘narrative’ almost exclusively
       refers to literary or fictional narratives. The narrative turn of the 1990s transformed nar-
       ratology from a structuralist approach to the analysis of literary texts into a meta-theory
       of the Humanities (Dawson, 2017; Kreiswirth, 2008), massively expanding the scope of
       the discipline (Scheffel, 2012; Sommer, 2012): so-called ‘post-classical’ narratology
       analyzes non-fictional texts like newspaper articles and blog posts (Klein and Martínez,
       2009), other narrative forms like films and video games (Ryan and Thon, 2014), and
       even legal, medical and historical narratives (Hühn et al., 2014). Varied as they may be,
       these narratives are still fundamentally textual, provided that ‘text’ is understood to
       include ‘not only language-based acts of communication but any deliberate and struc-
       tured use of signs’ (Ryan, 2017: 518).                
        The increased popularity of ‘narrative’, not just in academia, but among the general
       public, is in no small part due to Jean-François Lyotard. After The Postmodern Condition
       introduced the concept of grand récit, its unexpected success popularized the idea of
       narrative as a means to describe and explain cultural phenomena. In recent years, the
       term has become ubiquitous, turning into what Ophir (2018: 63) calls a placeholder: one
       of those commonly used terms ‘that people don’t bother to explain, and that are used as
       if they were familiar and well known’, when actually they are only insufficiently defined.
       Due to this terminological vagueness, narrative is often misconstrued as the opposite of
       fact or truth. Statements like ‘There is no right answer, only narrative’ (McIntyre, 2018:
       125) are common in discussions about post-truth.      
        Considering their enduring cultural impact, it is surprising that Lyotard’s grands
       récits have largely been ignored by narratological scholarship. Eminent narratologist
       Marie-Laure Ryan (2007: 30) voices the general consensus when asserting that Lyotard’s
       grand narratives ‘can only be called narratives in a metaphorical sense’. Illustrating more
       than just the chasm between Lyotard and narratological scholarship, her statement indi-
       cates an imbalance within the theoretical foundation of narratology itself: even after the
       narrative turn, narratologists are predominantly focused on textual narratives in the sense
       indicated above.3 Not without reason, they caution against ‘the risk of stretching the
       concept [of narrative] too thin’ (Ryan, 2017: 526) by applying it ‘to phenomena that are
       not textually embodied’ (Ryan, 2017: 528), and Lyotard’s use of the term is often cited as
       an example for the shortcomings of this approach (see Ryan, 2008: 344–8; Ryan, 2017:
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      100                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      526–7). As a result of this preference, a commonly accepted definition of non-textual
      narratives does not yet exist.                         
        Most narratologists agree that a textual narrative is ‘the representation of an event or
      a series of events. [. . .] Without an event or an action, you may have a “description,” an
      “exposition,” an “argument,” a “lyric,” a combination of these or something else alto-
      gether, but you won’t have a narrative’ (Abbott, 2008: 13; see Ryan, 2007: 23–4).
      Fundamental terminological distinctions were established half a century ago by French
      narratologist Genette (1983: 27), who proposes ‘to use the word story for the signified or
      narrative content [. . .], to use the word narrative for the signifier, statement, discourse
      or narrative text itself, and to use the word narrating for the producing narrative action’.
      A story, according to Genette, consists of a sequence of real or fictional events that are
      actualized into a narrative by process of narration.   
        Using Genette’s distinctions to refine Porter Abbott’s ‘thumbnail characterization’
      (Ryan, 2007: 23), the term ‘narrative’ can more precisely be described as a combination
      of two elements: the narrative discourse, that is, the deliberate and structured use of
      signs; and the story it conveys, that is, its meaning or content. In a slight modification of
      Genette, the term ‘story’ no longer indicates a series of events, but a cognitive construct
      evoked by the narrative discourse: ‘[W]e never see a story directly, but instead always
      pick it up through the narrative discourse. The story is always mediated [. . .] so that
      what we call the story is really something that we construct’ (Abbott, 2008: 20).
      Therefore, the concept of textual narrative can be defined as the combination of (1) a
      semiotic artifact and (2) the mental representation of a series of real or fictional events
      it invokes in the mind of its receiver.                
        Clearly, neither the proverbs cited in ‘Apostil on Narratives’ nor Lyotard’s notion of
      narrative as a discursive genre correspond to this definition. However, the question
      arises whether this can even legitimately be expected. While leaving the narrative inde-
      pendent of ‘any particular medium, and [. . .] of the distinction between fiction and
      non-fiction’ (Ryan, 2007: 26), this definition still refers to textual narratives only.
      Lyotard’s narratives, whatever else they may be, are discursive phenomena not embod-
      ied in individual semiotic artifacts. Furthermore, given his fundamental skepticism
      towards representation, it seems unlikely that Lyotard would conceive of narratives as
      representational constructs. Taking these objections into account, I will now develop a
      concept of non-textual narrative suitable for the description of cultural phenomena like
      post-truth. In a second step, I will redefine Lyotard’s petit récit within the framework of
      this new category.                                     
        Abbott’s (2008: 236) concept of masterplot constitutes a promising attempt to bridge
      the gap between textual and cultural narratives.4 The term refers to ‘[r]ecurrent skeletal
      stories, belonging to cultures and individuals that play a powerful role in questions of
      identity, values, and the understanding of life’ (2008: 236). As an example, Abbott (2008:
      46–7) refers to the ‘Cinderella masterplot’, ‘a thread of neglect, injustice, rebirth, and
      reward’ that occurs in many different forms. However, he also describes the 1995 murder
      trial of former NFL player O.J. Simpson as ‘a contest of narratives in which the contest-
      ants draw on masterplots’, namely (1) the story of the black man who is unjustly pun-
      ished for stepping ‘out of his place’; (2) the story of the battered wife and (3) the story of
      unjust privilege accorded to celebrity and wealth (Abbott, 2008: 48–9).

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                         101     
                                                             
        In general terms, Abbott (2008: 47) characterizes masterplots as ‘a kind of cultural
       glue that holds societies together’. Masterplots are the underlying narrative patterns
       derived from and simultaneously shaping the perception of real-world events: the O.J.
       Simpson case can be seen as a concrete manifestation of the masterplot of the black man
       unjustly punished for stepping ‘out of his place’, just like the Harry Potter novels can
       be read as modern adaptations of the Cinderella masterplot. Unfortunately, Abbott
       (2008: 58) does not sufficiently explore the concept: while his examples are convincing,
       the definition of masterplots as ‘coded narrative formulas that end with closure’ offers
       little insight. I will therefore combine Porter Abbott’s concept with a term borrowed from
       Albrecht Koschorke’s Fact and Fiction (2018 [2012]).  
        Koschorke (2018 [2012]: 17–18) conceives of narration as a selective process that
       reduces and simplifies the multitudes of narrative discourses circulating in a society.
       These discourses are transformed and partially codified in the form of narrative patterns
       that correspond to Porter Abbott’s masterplots. Since they are based on individual tales
       told within a community, these abstract patterns are easily recognizable to community
       members, allowing for identification and suggesting a specific perspective on certain
       events. Seeing a series of events as corresponding to a particular narrative pattern shapes
       their perception and interpretation. Once again referring to Porter Abbott’s vivid exam-
       ple: the narrative pattern of the black man unjustly punished for stepping ‘out of his
       place’ can be conceived as an abstraction based on countless individual experiences of
       racial discrimination and injustice, told and re-told innumerable times. While this pattern
       is recognizable to most people, to people of color it also offers the potential for identifi-
       cation. When perceived as an example of this pattern, the events involving O.J. and
       Jessica Simpson are understood in a particular way. By contrast, people who see the
       same events adhering to the narrative pattern of unjust privilege accorded to celebrity
       and wealth will inevitably reach a different conclusion. Importantly, both sides will feel
       justified in their position, which will influence their reaction to diverging opinions. In
       other words: by providing an interpretative structure, cultural narratives establish a cor-
       relation between events, affecting their perception, interpretation and meaning. While
       the definition of textual narrative presupposes some form of mediation, cultural narra-
       tives shape reality – a feature shared with Lyotard’s grand narratives.
        Using these insights to adapt the concept of textual narrative established above, I
       propose the following definition: a cultural narrative is a discursive constellation con-
       necting the multitudes of narrative discourses circulating within a community to a
       smaller number of abstract narrative patterns or masterplots. By establishing meaning-
       ful correlations between events, these patterns offer the potential for identification and
       interpretation to community members, shaping reality in the process.
        Since a similar perception of reality leads to shared opinions and judgements, which
       in turn foster the formation of a collective identity based on common values, one could
       argue that shared cultural narratives significantly contribute to the constitution of
       communities.5 Even more crucially, once accepted, the narrative provides the criteria for
       assessing the validity of information: what is considered true or false, right or wrong, real
       or fake is now contingent on its conformity with a group’s foundational narrative. In this
       way, each cultural narrative establishes its own epistemic sphere, literally creating truths
       and shaping reality – which brings me neatly back to the post-truth phenomenon.

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      102                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
        Before analyzing the mechanisms of post-truth, however, it is necessary to conclude
      both the narratological and the philosophical thread of this argument by explicitly rede-
      fining Jean-François Lyotard’s petit récit. In itself, the definition of cultural narrative is
      not suitable for this purpose, since it is deliberately couched in general terms to be most
      widely applicable. To accommodate its particular properties, I conceptualize ‘small nar-
      rative’ as a type of cultural narrative characterized by the traits and functions delineated
      above. Combining fundamental concepts of narrative theory with the insights of Lyotard
      scholarship, I propose the following definition: a small narrative is a locally and tempo-
      rally limited type of cultural narrative, that is, a discursive constellation connecting the
      multitudes of narrative discourses circulating within a community to a smaller number of
      abstract narrative patterns. Such a petit récit arises to address a specific problem and
      functions as a counter-narrative to challenge the hegemonic discourse. It constitutes
      independent communities by establishing its own epistemic sphere, legitimizing alterna-
      tive voices and viewpoints. Being intrinsically unsuited to assume discursive dominance,
      the small narrative disappears once its task is fulfilled. Couched in narratological terms,
      this redefinition offers the first structural description of Lyotard’s elusive petit récit,
      allowing for the category’s subsequent use in the analysis and description of post-truth.
      Small Narratives and Epistemic Spheres                 
      How can the redefined petit récit be applied to the post-truth situation? In ‘Lessons in
      Paganism’, Lyotard (1989: 135) outlines the idea of a society ‘based upon [small] narra-
      tives’ that would allow previously marginalized groups like ‘women, children, metics,
      slaves, foreigners and dissidents’ to take part in public discourse without being silenced
      by the hegemonic power of a grand narrative. The term paganism Lyotard (1989: 136)
      uses to describe this society etymologically derives from the Latin pagus, which ‘was
      used to refer to the frontier region on the edge of town’, the fringes of the polis. In
      Lyotard’s terminology, pagus indicates ‘a region that has not been assimilated by a con-
      sensual politics’ (Docherty, 2011: 158) and subjected to the dominance of a grand narra-
      tive. In The Differend, Lyotard famously likens a similar constellation to an archipelago
      (see Sim, 2011), postulating that ‘[e]ach genre of discourse would be like an island’
      (Lyotard, 1988: 130), governed by a particular set of rules and distinct from all other
      islands (see Sim, 2020: 69–70). While communication between different discursive gen-
      res is possible through the Kantian ‘faculty of judgement’ (Lyotard, 1988: 130), Lyotard
      is most interested in the moment of communicative failure he calls a differend.
        Conceptualized within the framework of phrase linguistics, differends arise from
      those ‘encounters between phrases of heterogeneous regimen’ (Lyotard, 1988: 29) that
      cannot be mediated. Transposing these incidents of pragmatic incommensurability into a
      social and political context, Lyotard (1988: xi) defines a differend as ‘a case of conflict
      between (at least) two parties, that cannot be equitably resolved for lack of a rule of judg-
      ment applicable to both arguments’. In these situations, one party has wronged another,
      but ‘the plaintiff is divested of the means to argue and becomes for that reason a victim’
      (Lyotard, 1988: 9). For the same reason, the wrong done to the victim cannot be recog-
      nized and redressed by an adjudicating tribunal, since deliberation and judgement would
      have to be carried out in the language of the dominant party. Lyotard’s most famous dif-
      ferends relate to a Holocaust denier’s twisted argumentation against the existence of gas
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                         103     
                                                             
       chambers (see Lyotard, 1988: 3–4) and the Nazis’ silencing of Jewish voices (see Lyotard,
       1988: 100–3). In both cases, the victims are prevented from expressing their injury in
       terms either their opponent or any jury would accept. 
        The epistemic spheres introduced in the previous section can be conceptualized as
       adaptations of both paganism and the differend: based on a petit récit, each sphere is
       ruled by its own epistemic criteria, determining what is considered true or false, right or
       wrong, real or fake. Despite obvious structural similarities, there are important differ-
       ences between the resulting constellation and Lyotard’s metaphorical archipelago: while
       his attention in The Differend is focused on those encounters of heterogeneous phrase
       regimens that result in differends, successful communication between differend ‘islands’
       of discursive genres is generally possible, mediated by the faculty of judgement. By
       contrast, epistemic spheres are fundamentally incommensurable, since inhabitants of dif-
       ferent epistemic spheres do not even share a common concept of truth or factfulness,
       creating what I call, with reference to Lyotard, an epistemic differend.
        Before the concept of epistemic spheres can be applied to the current post-truth situ-
       ation, the state of postmodern society needs to be considered. Despite having lost much
       of their former influence, grand narratives are still present within public discourse, beset
       from all sides by petits récits. Since epistemic spheres originate from these locally lim-
       ited counter-narratives, the voices and viewpoints they legitimize are by definition both
       contrarian and subaltern in relation to the hegemonic discourse. And while this structural
       power imbalance resembles the constellation of victim and oppressor described in The
       Differend, there is one crucial difference. As indicated by his use of terms like ‘litiga-
       tion’, ‘tribunal’ or ‘plaintiff’, Lyotard implicitly assumes a juridical setting: a victim
       looking for arbitration by a third party, which turns out to be linguistically impossible.
       By contrast, the inhabitants of an epistemic sphere are structurally unable to seek arbitra-
       tion despite their discursive disadvantage, since even the attempt would require them to
       accept outside epistemic criteria. For this reason, inhabitants of such a sphere will often
       perceive themselves as victims, while simultaneously insisting on the exclusive validity
       of their sphere’s epistemic criteria, their individual truth and facts.
       Post-Truth and Populism                               
       In the last step of my argument, I will now use the concepts of epistemic sphere and petit
       récit to describe and explain the most prominent example of post-truth politics, Donald
       Trump’s MAGA movement. To demonstrate that neither the scope of analysis nor the
       implications of its results are limited to this particular the case, I will briefly situate
       Trumpism within the context of contemporary populism. 
        Conceptualized as ‘a rhetorical style of communications’ (Norris and Inglehart, 2019:
       66) rather than a fully developed ideology (see Stanley, 2008), populism is characterized
       by an irreconcilable dichotomy between two supposedly homogeneous groups, ‘the
       people’ and ‘the elites’. In this model, political sovereignty is derived solely from the
       will of the people who are envisioned as fundamentally virtuous, while the elites are
       conceived of as inherently selfish and dishonest. The notion of a corrupt ruling class leads
       to a crisis of legitimacy and representation leaving many people to feel disenfranchised,
       causing fundamental distrust in political institutions and evoking the desire for a
       charismatic leader to champion the people’s cause against the establishment.
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      104                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
        Despite drawing criticism from scholars like Laclau (2005: 3–20) and Traverso (2019:
      15–19), this approach to populism has proven useful to describe the style of politics
      embodied by Donald Trump (see Conley, 2020; Sligo, 2018; Wahl-Jorgensen, 2018).
      Trump’s 2016 victory can be seen as ‘part of a general tendency in which movements
      emerge to challenge the established powers-that-be and to a certain degree globalization
      itself (the euro, the EU, the US establishment) from the right’ (Traverso, 2019: 25). These
      movements include Boris Johnson’s pro-Brexit campaign in the UK, the so-called
      Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) in Germany, the Front National in France, Law and
      Justice (PiS) in Poland and Victor Orbán’s Fidesz in Hungary.
        Donald Trump presents himself as fighting for the interests of supposedly ‘ordinary
      Americans’ against intellectual elites and the political establishment. Feeling left behind
      by economic developments like globalization and turned into strangers in their own land
      by the rise of liberal values, many of his supporters resent and distrust a political system
      they perceive to be ‘rigged’ against them. Taking advantage of the charisma afforded to
      him by his status as a TV celebrity, Trump uses slogans like ‘Make America Great Again’
      to unify this disparate collection of grievances, while his deliberately ‘angry’ rhetoric
      stokes existing resentments in order to delegitimize democratic institutions. As Hahl
      et al. (2018: 3) demonstrate, his role as champion of the people turns even his incoherent
      speaking style and demonstrably false statements to his advantage, since ‘a lying dema-
      gogue can appear as a distinctively authentic champion’ to those feeling betrayed by the
      system. By flaunting his disdain for political and social norms, as well as his blatant
      disregard for the standard of truthfulness, Trump demonstrates his anti-establishment
      position. This aspect of his rhetoric is particularly effective since the very concept of
      truth ‘is no longer perceived by many [of his followers] as disinterested or factual but
      instead may be considered to be corrupted’ (Sligo, 2018: 138) by the very elites Trump
      belittles and condemns.6                               
        This description shows how Trump-style politics foster a post-truth environment,
      which in turn provides the ideal conditions for the flourishing of populism: both phe-
      nomena appeal to emotions rather than rational argument, creating a constellation of
      tribal epistemology that challenges the idea of universal truth. After situating Trump in
      the context of both contemporary populism and post-truth, the stage is set for the final
      step in the argument: demonstrating the practical usefulness of epistemic spheres for the
      analysis of the post-truth phenomenon by applying the category to Donald Trump’s
      MAGA movement. Since epistemic spheres are based on small narratives, which in turn
      have been conceptualized as a particular type of cultural narrative, this approach raises
      an obvious question: how does the concept of narrative feature in the description of
      Trump’s post-truth politics?                           
        The answer hinges on the slogan giving the whole movement its name, Make America
      Great Again. While not in itself a narrative, the slogan can be understood as its ‘encap-
      sulation’ (Weixler, 2021: 127) or, with Koschorke (2018 [2012]: 213), as ‘a microplot,
      which is to say a motivated sequence between two [or more] states’. Specifically, MAGA
      invokes a narrative pattern familiar from ancient myths and modern blockbuster movies
      alike: the triadic sequence of an original state of harmony, its disruption and eventual
      utopian restitution though the efforts of a hero. Once, so the message goes, America was
      great. Then globalization destroyed millions of jobs, liberalism eroded traditional con-
      servative values, threatening the American way of life, and only Donald Trump can

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                         105     
                                                             
       reverse this aberration and make America great again. According to this description, the
       present is inherently flawed compared to the glorious past, a view shared by many Trump
       supporters who feel disadvantaged, victims of historical and political forces beyond their
       understanding or control (Weixler, 2021: 145–9).      
        When arguing that Make America Great Again can be understood as the encapsula-
       tion of a small narrative, this last aspect is particularly significant. Since it condenses a
       large number of narrative discourses and individual experiences into one narrative
       pattern, offering identification and ready-made explanations to many Americans, the
       MAGA slogan does plausibly function as a stand-in for a cultural narrative. In order
       also to qualify as a petit récit, however, additional criteria have to be met: while it is
       possible to regard this particular narrative as locally and temporally limited and having
       arisen in reaction to a specific problem, can it really be considered a counter-narrative?
       After all, the slogan encapsulating it provides identification to millions of people,
       helped to elect a real-estate mogul president and dominates US domestic politics to this
       day. Yet, as argued above, the followers of a populist movement often feel disadvan-
       taged by a ‘rigged’ system and corrupt elites. As paradoxical as it might seem for a
       group considering itself ‘the people’ to be represented by a counter-narrative, this posi-
       tion is consistent within the populist worldview: in a system ruled by corrupt politi-
       cians, out-of-touch liberal intellectuals and mainstream media disseminating fake news,
       Trump’s followers see themselves as a silent majority, fighting for their values against
       ‘woke culture’ and political correctness.             
        This self-perception is likely reinforced by recent efforts of the US government to
       assert the rule of law vis-à-vis Donald Trump and his most radical supporters. On 1 July
       2021, the US House of Representatives established the ‘United States House Select
       Committee on the January 6 Attack’ to investigate the storming of the Capitol on 6
       January 2021 and identify the persons responsible. By July 2022, almost 900 people had
       been charged for their involvement in the failed insurrection, with some being sentenced
       to several years in prison (see Cheney and Gerstein, 2022). On 8 August 2022, the
       Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) executed a search warrant for former president
       Trump’s private residence in Mar-a-Lago, recovering sensitive government documents
       (see Haberman et al., 2022). This action was met with outrage from conservative circles.
       Roberts (2022), president of the conservative think tank the Heritage Foundation, con-
       sidered the search ‘yet another example of the federal government weaponizing law
       enforcement to punish political enemies, silence critics, and send a message to those
       whom it views as enemies’.                            
        Roberts’ rhetoric both reflects and feeds into the populist assumptions underlying the
       MAGA ideology: the notion of the FBI being used in a politically motivated attack by an
       illegitimate ‘leftist’ government seemingly confirms the suspicions and fears of many
       Trump supporters, fueling their distrust towards democratic institutions and deepening
       the populist divide. Thus, recent developments and their interpretation by conservative
       pundits and media outlets reinforce the epistemic differend separating the MAGA move-
       ment and its epistemic sphere from the rest of society.
        It has been demonstrated that the cultural narrative encapsulated in Make America
       Great Again can legitimately be considered a petit récit, and analogous arguments can be
       made for other populist movements like the Brexit leave campaign (see Weixler, 2021:
       146; cf. Sim, 2020: 60–61), but also for Covid and climate change deniers. Each of these

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      groups is surrounded by an epistemic sphere based on a small narrative and governed by
      its own rules to determine what is considered real, true and factual. Each sphere is
      separate from all others through epistemic differends and, collectively, these spheres and
      their underlying small narratives constitute the post-truth condition.
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      This article develops a functional analysis of the narrative mechanisms of post-truth,
      addressing three distinct but interrelated topics: Jean-François Lyotard’s inconsistent use of
      the term ‘narrative’, the lack of a comprehensive definition of cultural narrative in narra-
      tological theory, and the epistemic fragmentation that characterizes a post-truth environ-
      ment. Its initial hypothesis is based on the structural similarities between such a constellation
      and Lyotard’s description of the postmodern condition: the mechanisms of post-truth may
      be described in narrative terms, with particular reference to the category of petit récit.
        Considering Lyotard’s inconsistent use of the term ‘narrative’ and the resulting con-
      ceptual conflation, I utilize contemporary narrative theory to develop a comprehensive
      definition of cultural narrative, framing Lyotard’s small narrative as a particular case of
      this superordinate category and providing a viable definition for one of the most notori-
      ously vague terms of current academic discourse. Combining the newly defined petit
      récit with Lyotard’s concepts of paganism and the differend, I develop the category of
      epistemic sphere as a means to describe and explain the epistemic fragmentation of
      society characteristic for the post-truth situation: by shaping the perception of reality,
      each foundational petit récit establishes an epistemic sphere governed by its own crite-
      ria for what is true or false, right or wrong, real or fake. In order to demonstrate its
      analytical validity, I then apply the concept to Donald Trump’s post-truth politics, after
      situating his MAGA movement within the broader context of contemporary populism.
        Conceptualizing the post-truth environment as consisting of numerous epistemic
      spheres based on small narratives explains central features of the current social and polit-
      ical landscape, where the existing hegemonial discourse is being challenged by multiple
      alternative voices and positions. While this constellation corresponds to Jean-François
      Lyotard’s notion of petits récits as locally limited counter-narratives, their subversive
      power, originally envisioned to give voice to the oppressed, has been usurped by the
      political right. Furthermore, since each sphere establishes its own epistemic criteria, their
      respective concepts of truth are separated by epistemic differends: the inhabitants of dif-
      ferent epistemic spheres do not just disagree on what is true in a specific situation, but on
      what truth is on a conceptual level. Thus, post-truth calls into question the principle of a
      universal epistemic foundation of discourse: the implicit assumption that knowledge is
      different from belief, and that truthfulness is a viable standard. This epistemic contract
      allows for the constructive exchange of ideas, constituting the foundation not only of the
      democratic process but of the social fabric itself: by undermining the epistemic contract,
      post-truth poses a threat to democratic societies all over the world.
      Acknowledgements                                       
      First and foremost, I would like to thank Olga Fedorenko for her encouragement and constructive
      criticism, as well as Peter W. Milne, who helped me navigate the deep waters of Lyotard
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                         107     
                                                             
       scholarship. Additional thanks go to Nicholas James for his thorough copyediting of a previous
       version of this article, and to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful suggestions.
       Funding                                               
       The author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
       publication of this article: The research for this article was supported by the program ‘Basic
       Research for the Humanities and Social Sciences for Mid-Career Researchers’ of the National
       Research Foundation of Korea (Project Number 100-20200087).
                                                             
       ORCID iD                                              
       Christian Baier https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7012-1284 
                                                             
       Notes                                                 
       1. Previous attempts to describe the post-truth phenomenon using Lyotard’s concepts have
         mostly focused on the différend: Hoffman-Schwartz (2022: 261) sets out to demonstrate the
         category’s relevance ‘in a present marked by neo-fascist insurgency yoked to the pseudoepis-
         temology of “post-truth”’, and McLennan (2018: 1) argues that ‘a look back at Lyotard’s
         work on the differend may help us to get our bearings in a socio-political climate that has
         been dubbed “post-truth”’. When applying the concept of petit récit to the post-truth phenom-
         enon in Lyotard on Politics, Sim (2020) fails to address the fundamental inconsistencies in
         Lyotard’s use of the term ‘narrative’ and remains somewhat superficial in engaging with the
         relevant scholarship on post-truth. In Post-Truth, Scepticism and Power (Sim, 2019), small
         narratives are barely even mentioned.               
       2. In accordance with the conventions of Wittgenstein scholarship, the Philosophical
         Investigations (Wittgenstein, 2009 [1953]) are referenced not by page number but by
         paragraph.                                          
       3. Müller-Funk’s (2013) Die Kultur und ihre Narrative (translated into English as The
         Architecture of Modern Culture [2012]) avoids the usual bias toward textual narratives, but
         remains of limited use, since the author leaves fundamental narratological categories unde-
         fined. In his recently published monograph Das narrative Gehirn, Breithaupt (2022) explores
         narrativity from the perspective of the cognitive sciences. While offering many intriguing
         insights, his concept of ‘narrative’ (he mostly uses the term ‘narration’) also remains insuf-
         ficiently defined.                                  
       4. Porter Abbott considers and rejects a number of similar terms such as Schank’s (1995: 147–
         88) ‘story skeleton’, Gould’s (2000) ‘canonical story’, C.G. Jung’s ‘archetype’ and, most
         indicatively, ‘master narrative’, a term often used synonymously with Lyotard’s grand récit:
         ‘[I]t should be obvious why “master narrative” would not work for this concept. A narrative
         is a particular rendering of a story. Works like War and Peace or Harry Potter and the Goblet
         of Fire are narratives. The masterplots that undergird these narratives are much more skeletal
         and adaptable, and they can recur in narrative after narrative’ (Abbott, 2008: 47).
       5. Here, the category of cultural narrative intersects with the extensive field of Cultural Memory
         Studies (see Erll and Nünning, 2010), in particular with Ricœur’s (1991a, 1991b) notion of
         narrative identity and Gehrke’s (2001) concept of intentional history.
       6. To describe the worldview of blue-collar white conservative Christians, Hochschild (2016)
         develops the concept of deep story, an interesting if flawed attempt to establish a localized
         discourse based on narrative. Norris and Inglehart (2019: 87–131) attribute the rise of right-
         wing populism to a ‘cultural backlash’ against liberal progress, while Wahl-Jorgensen (2018)
         analyzes Trump’s deliberate use of angry rhetoric, and Miller (2021) offers an embodied

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
        assemblage approach to the role of spectacle. The brazen disregard for truth characteristic of
        contemporary populism was anticipated in Frankfurt’s (2005) lucid analysis, On Bullshit.
      References                                             
      Abbott, H Porter (2008) The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative, 2nd edn. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Baggini, Julian (2017) A Short History of Truth. London: Quercus.
      Bennington, Geoffrey (1988) Lyotard: Writing the Event. New York, NY: Manchester University
        Press.                                               
      Brahms, Yael (2020) Philosophy of Post-Truth. Tel Aviv: Institute for National Security Studies.
        Available at: https://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep23537 (accessed 1 June 2022).
      Breithaupt, Fritz (2022) Das narrative Gehirn: Was unsere Neuronen erzählen. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
      Bufacchi, Vittorio (2021) Truth, lies and tweets: A consensus theory of post-truth. Philosophy &
        Social Criticism 47(3): 347–361.                     
      Cheney, Kyle and Gerstein, Josh (2022) Where January 6 prosecutions stand, 18 months after
        the attack. Politico, 7 July. Available at: https://www.politico.com/news/2022/07/07/jan-6-
        prosecutions-months-later-00044354 (accessed 1 September 2022).
      Conley, Richard S (2020) Donald Trump and American Populism. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
        University Press.                                    
      D’Ancona, Matthew (2017) Post-Truth: The New War on Truth and How to Fight Back. London:
        Ebury Press.                                         
      Dawson, Paul (2017) How many ‘turns’ does it take to change a discipline? Narratology and the
        interdisciplinary rhetoric of the narrative turn. In: Hansen, Per Krogh, Pier, John, Roussin,
        Philippe, et al. (eds) Emerging Vectors of Narratology. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp.
        405–434.                                             
      Docherty, Thomas (2011) Paganism, pagus. In: Sim, Stuart (ed.) The Lyotard Dictionary.
        Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 158–159.  
      Erll, Astrid and Nünning, Ansgar (eds) (2010) A Companion to Cultural Memory Studies. Berlin,:
        Walter de Gruyter.                                   
      Frankfurt, Harry G (2005) On Bullshit. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Gehrke, Hans-Joachim (2001) Myth, history, and collective identity: Uses of the past in Ancient
        Greek and beyond. In: Luraghi, Nino (ed.) The Historian’s Craft in the Age of Herodotus.
        Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 286–313.        
      Genette, Gérard (1983) Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
        Press.                                               
      Gould, Stephen Jay (2000) Jim Bowie’s letter and Bill Buckner’s legs. Natural History 109(4):
        26–40.                                               
      Haberman, Maggie, Protess, Ben, and Goldman, Adam (2022) F.B.I. searches Trump’s Florida
        home, signaling escalation of inquiries. New York Times, 8 August, Available at: https://
        www.nytimes.com/2022/08/08/us/politics/trump-fbi-mar-a-lago.html (accessed 1 September
        2022).                                               
      Hahl, Oliver, Kim, Minjae, and Zuckerman Sivan, Ezra W (2018) The authentic appeal of the lying
        demagogue: Proclaiming the deeper truth about political illegitimacy. American Sociological
        Review 83(1): 1–33.                                  
      Hertzberg, Lars (2014) Language-games and private language. In: Jolley, Kelly Dean (ed.)
        Wittgenstein: Key Concepts. London: Routledge, pp. 41–50.
      Hochschild, Arlie Russell (2016) Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the
        American Right. New York, NY: The New Press.         

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baier                                         109     
                                                             
       Hoffman-Schwartz, Daniel (2022) Lyotard and the trolls: The differend, sophistry, and the right.
         Philosophy Today 66(2): 261–286.                    
       Hühn, Peter, Meister, Jan Christoph, Pier, John, et al. (eds) (2014) Handbook of Narratology,
         vol. 2. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.                  
       Jones, Graham (2014) Lyotard Reframed: Interpreting Key Thinkers for the Arts. London: I.B.
         Tauris.                                             
       Klein, Christian and Martínez, Matías (eds) (2009) Wirklichkeitserzählungen: Felder, Formen und
         Funktionen nicht-literarischen Erzählens. Stuttgart: J.B. Metzler’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung.
       Koschorke, Albrecht (2018 [2012]) Fact and Fiction: Elements of a General Theory of Narrative.
         Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.                          
       Kreiswirth, Martin (2008) Narrative turn in the humanities. In: Herman, David, Jahn, Manfred, and
         Ryan, Marie-Laure (eds) Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory. London: Routledge.
       Laclau, Ernesto (2005) On Populist Reason. London: Verso.
       Lyotard, Jean-François (1988) The Differend: Phrases in Dispute. Manchester: Manchester
         University Press.                                   
       Lyotard, Jean-François (1989) The Lyotard Reader, ed. Andrew E Benjamin. Oxford: Blackwell.
       Lyotard, Jean-François (1992) The Postmodern Explained: Correspondence 1982–1985, ed.
         Julian Pefanis and Morgan Thomas. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
       Lyotard, Jean-François (1999 [1979]) The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, trans.
         Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
       McGinn, Marie (1997) Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Wittgenstein and the Philosophical
         Investigations. London: Routledge.                  
       McIntyre, Lee C (2018) Post-Truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
       McLennan, Matthew (2018) Differend and ‘post-truth’. French Journal for Media Research 9:
         1–13.                                               
       Meister, Jan Christoph (2014) Narratology. In: Hühn, Peter, Meister, Jan Christoph, Pier, John,
         et al. (eds) Handbook of Narratology, 2nd edn. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 623–645.
       Miller, Jacob C (2021) Spectacle and Trumpism: An Embodied Assemblage Approach. Bristol:
         Bristol University Press.                           
       Müller-Funk, Wolfgang (2013) Die Kultur und ihre Narrative, 2nd edn. Vienna: Springer.
       Norris, Pippa and Inglehart, Ronald (2019) Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit, and Authoritarian
         Populism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.    
       OED (2017) Post-Truth, adj. In: Oxford English Dictionary. Available at: https://www.oed.com/
         view/Entry/58609044?redirectedFrom=post-truth&amp (accessed 1 June 2022).
       Ophir, Adi (2018) Concept. In: Bernstein, JM, Ophir, Adi, and Stoler, Ann Laura (eds) Political
         Concepts: A Critical Lexicon. New York, NY: Fordham University Press.
       Purvis, Tony (2011) Little narrative. In: Sim, Stuart (ed.) The Lyotard Dictionary. Edinburgh:
         Edinburgh University Press, pp. 133–135.            
       Readings, Bill (1991) Introducing Lyotard: Art and Politics. London: Routledge.
       Ricœur, Paul (1991a) Life in quest of narrative. In: Wood, David (ed.) On Paul Ricœur: Narrative
         and Interpretation. London: Routledge, pp. 20–33.   
       Ricœur, Paul (1991b) Narrative identity. Philosophy Today 35(1): 73–81.
       Roberts, David (2017) Donald Trump and the rise of tribal epistemology: Journalism cannot be
         neutral toward a threat to the conditions that make it possible. Vox, 19 May. Available at:
         https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/3/22/14762030/donald-trump-tribal-
         epistemology (accessed 1 June 2022)                 
       Roberts, Kevin (2022) Heritage president on Mar-a-Lago raid: ‘Imagine what they think they
         can do to the average American.’ Heritage Foundation, 9 August. Available at: https://www.
         heritage.Org/press/heritage-president-mar-lago-raid-imagine-what-they-think-they-can-do-
         the-average-american (accessed 1 September 2022).   

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      110                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Ryan, Marie-Laure (2007) Towards a definition of narrative. In: Herman, David (ed.) The
        Cambridge Companion to Narrative. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 22–35.
      Ryan, Marie-Laure (2008) Narrative. In: Herman, David, Jahn, Manfred, and Ryan, Marie-Laure
        (eds) Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory. London: Routledge, pp. 344–348.
      Ryan, Marie-Laure (2017) Narrative. In: Szeman, Imre, Blacker, Sarah, and Sully, Justin (eds) A
        Companion to Critical and Cultural Theory. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 517–530.
      Ryan, Marie-Laure and Thon, Jan-Noël (eds) (2014) Storyworlds across Media: Toward a Media-
        Conscious Narratology. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
      Schalkwyk, David (1997) Why the social bond cannot be a passing fashion: Reading Wittgenstein
        against Lyotard. Theoria: A Journal of Social and Political Theory 89: 116–131.
      Schank, Roger C (1995) Tell Me a Story: Narrative and Intelligence. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
        University Press.                                    
      Scheffel, Michael (2012) Nach dem ‘narrative turn’: Handbücher und Lexika des 21. Jahrhunderts.
        DIEGESIS 1(1): 43–55. Available at: https://www.diegesis.uni-wuppertal.de/index.php/
        diegesis/article/view/84 (accessed 1 June 2022).     
      Sim, Stuart (2011) Archipelago. In: Sim, Stuart (ed.) The Lyotard Dictionary. Edinburgh:
        Edinburgh University Press, pp. 21–22.               
      Sim, Stuart (2019) Post-Truth, Scepticism and Power. New York, NY: Springer.
      Sim, Stuart (2020) Lyotard and Politics: A Critical Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
        Press.                                               
      Sligo, Frank (2018) Trump’s populism, la trahison des clercs and embracing dissent. Media
        International Australia 169(1): 131–143.             
      Sluga, Hans D (2011) Wittgenstein. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
      Smith, Richard G (2011) Postmodern, postmodernity. In: Sim, Stuart (ed.) The Lyotard Dictionary.
        Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 184–186.  
      Sommer, Ron (2012) The merger of classical and postclassical narratologies and the consolidated
        future of narrative theory. DIEGESIS 1(1): 143–157. Available at: https://www.diegesis.
        uni-wuppertal.de/index.php/diegesis/article/view/96 (accessed 1 June 2022).
      Stanley, Ben (2008) The thin ideology of populism. Journal of Political Ideologies 13(1): 95–110.
      Tesich, Steve (1992) A government of lies. The Nation, 6 January. Available at: https://www.the-
        freelibrary.com/A+government+of+lies.-a011665982 (accessed 1 June 2022).
      Traverso, Enzo (2019) The New Faces of Fascism: Populism and the Far Right. London: Verso.
      Wahl-Jorgensen, Karin (2018) Media coverage of shifting emotional regimes: Donald Trump’s
        angry populism. Media, Culture & Society 40(5): 766–778.
      Weixler, Antonius (2021) Make control great again: Die narrative Konstruktion ‘eingeweihten
        Wissens’ in Verschwörungserzählungen. In: Weixler, Antonius, Chihaia, Matei, Martínez,
        Matías, et al. (eds) Postfaktisches Erzählen? Post-Truth – Fake News – Narration. Berlin:
        Walter de Gruyter, pp. 127–156.                      
      Wittgenstein, Ludwig (2009 [1953]) Philosophische Untersuchungen. Philosophical Investigations.
        eds. Anscombe, Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret, Hacker, PMS, Schulte, Joachim, et al. Malden,
        MA: Wiley-Blackwell.                                 
      Christian Baier is an Associate Professor in the Department of German Language and Literature
      at Seoul National University in South Korea. His research interests include the theory of fictional-
      ity and the relation between autobiography and autofiction, as well as the works of Thomas Mann,
      Franz Kafka and Günter Grass. His current research focuses on the concept of narrative, especially
      in its non-textual, discursive variations and their epistemic and social implications.