[PAGE 1]
 1258404                                                     
 research-article2024 TCS0010.1177/02632764241258404Theory, Culture & SocietyBaća
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       QAnon   and the Epistemic             2024, Vol. 41(4) 111 –132
                                              © The Author(s) 2024
       Communities   of the Unreal:                          
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       A Conceptual  Toolkit  for         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462442142125588440044
       a Sociology of Grassroots           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Conspiracism                                          
                                                             
                                                             
       Bojan Baća                                            
       University of Montenegro, Corvinus University of Budapest and University of Gothenburg
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       The messy politics of combating the COVID-19 pandemic, compounded by the
       confusion caused by the global (dis)infodemic, have propelled conspiracism from the
       fringes of society into the public mainstream. Despite the growing political impact of
       digitally enabled conspiracy theories, they are predominantly delegitimized on three
       fronts – as psychopathology, pseudoscience, and/or parapolitics. In contrast, this article
       employs three non-pathologizing conceptual counteroffers borrowed from critical
       theory, deconstructionist historiography, and citizenship studies – namely, cognitive
       mapping, narrative emplotment, and performative citizenship – to politicize conspiracy
       theorizing ‘from below’. Using QAnon as a case-in-point, the article introduces
       two novel concepts that invite a sociological approach to conspiracism: first, the
       epistemic communities of the unreal, which designates the participatory, interactive, and
       decentralized nature of collaboratively creating unreal explanations of the real world;
       and second, grassroots conspiracism, which denotes the ways in which these bottom-
       up, horizontal, and collective meaning-making practices and knowledge-production
       processes are expanding spaces of and for politics.   
       Keywords                                              
       cognitive mapping, conspiracy theories, epistemic communities of the unreal,
       grassroots conspiracism, narrative emplotment, performative citizenship, QAnon
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Bojan Baća. Emails: bojan.baca@gu.se; bojan.baca@ucg.ac.me
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      112                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      Introduction: From Pathologizing to Politicizing       
      Conspiracy Theories                                    
      Conspiracists have hitherto only interpreted the world in various ways; now, their goal is
      to change it. Two decades ago, Anthony Giddens (2002: 71) addressed the unpredictable
      and destabilizing nature of globalization, arguing that its ultimate outcome would be a
      global society ‘fraught with anxieties’ and ‘scarred by deep divisions’, one in which
      ordinary people would be ensnared in the ‘grip of forces over which [they] have no con-
      trol’. Nevertheless, by focusing on the tectonic shifts initiated by national governments,
      international organizations, and transnational corporations, Giddens ignored the incre-
      mental disruptions generated by new information and communication technologies
      (Mason, 2022; Rogers, 2023). With social media platforms as a key nexus of social
      interactions today, we now face these low-intensity subversions on a daily basis, which
      in turn foster the emergence of global movements challenging the official narratives of
      just about everything: from the necessity of vaccines to the shape of our planet.
        Isolated in their homes and constantly bombarded with contradictory (mis)informa-
      tion during the COVID-19 pandemic, people around the world have been confronted
      with competing, shifting, and often conflicting expert-informed national strategies to
      combat the spread of the coronavirus. Their ensuing mistrust in official institutions mir-
      rored the recognition of inherent imperfections in scientific knowledge and the inade-
      quate preparedness of public authorities in tackling unfamiliar threats (Jennings et al.,
      2021; Kużelewska and Tomaszuk, 2022; Philipp-Mullera et al., 2022).1 Algorithm-driven
      data designed to target specific demographic groups eventually transformed their skepti-
      cism-turned-denialism into lenses through which they began to see completely different
      realities (Birchall and Knight, 2023; Zoglauer, 2023). Ultimately, the messy politics of
      combating the global pandemic, coupled with the noise generated by the associated (dis)
      infodemic, led to an unintended consequence – a perfect storm of populism, pseudosci-
      entism, and conspiracism within the public sphere (Ringe and Rennó, 2023; Thompson
      and Smulewicz-Zucker, 2018). Instead of fostering critical reflexivity among the citi-
      zenry, I argue that Giddens’ (2002) proposed solution to global challenges has become a
      political issue in its own right: the engagement of laypersons with experts in issues char-
      acterized by imperfect knowledge has escalated information-cum-symbolic pollution,
      giving conspiracist overtones to various civic initiatives aimed at regaining a sense of
      control in the face of a growing feeling of unreality (Butter and Knight, 2023; Rogers,
      2023). Namely, the combined acts of questioning political values, debating civic duties,
      updating imperfect knowledge, and redefining social norms in the pursuit of ‘democra-
      tizing democracy’ during times of uncertainty have inadvertently paved the way for the
      proliferation of conspiracy theorizing ‘from below’.   
        While QAnon can be politically described as a ‘distasteful social movement’ (Eyerman
      and Esseveld, 1992), epistemically it can be seen as an ‘inevitable outgrowth of the
      Unreal’, which refers to ‘an approach to politics that forsakes interpretation of a common
      set of facts in favor of creating closed universes of mutually reinforcing facts and inter-
      pretations’ (Zuckerman, 2019: 4). The idea around which this cult-like movement
      emerged – that a secret cabal of Satan-worshipping and cannibalistic pedophiles is con-
      trolling the world through the deep state – may sound absurd; yet, what seems unreal to
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          113     
                                                             
       some may gradually become a phenomenological reality for others (Aaronovitch, 2010;
       Dentith, 2018; Zoglauer, 2023). Notwithstanding their ideological distance from the
       political mainstream, conspiracists are still comprehensible human beings.2 Accordingly,
       I use QAnon as a case-in-point to illustrate the ways in which bottom-up, horizontal, and
       collaborative conspiracy theorizing, powered by platformization and gamification, meets
       the inherent needs of its adherents for meaning, purpose, certainty, community, and
       agency in instances when official institutions fail to provide these essentials. In the
       deeply disturbing conspiratorial scenario where an all-powerful satanic secret society of
       child-blood drinkers is believed to be running the world, a sense of epistemic comfort
       and political consolation for QAnon believers lies precisely in the existence of a network
       of likeminded peers who come together to expose and thwart this evil (Bloom and
       Moskalenko, 2021; Rothschild, 2021). By depathologizing conspiracism, I argue, we can
       gain a deeper understanding of the reality of political (dis)alienation in today’s, to bor-
       row Giddens’ (2002) expression, ‘runaway world’.      
        Given that conspiracy theories are not only deemed ‘something we are not permitted
       to think but also the very subject is something we are not permitted to take seriously’
       (Robertson, 2017: 6), the meaning-making practices and knowledge-production pro-
       cesses through which conspiracists understand, frame, and justify their phenomenologi-
       cal (un)reality remain yet to be explored.3 For that reason, this article approaches
       conspiracism as an ‘epistemic community’ – that is, a network of individuals from
       diverse backgrounds who share intersubjective understandings, patterns of reasoning,
       and ways of viewing the world, and who are committed to creating, applying, and vali-
       dating knowledge based on their shared communal beliefs, symbolic codes, and discur-
       sive practices (Haas, 1992; Meyer and Molyneux-Hodgson, 2010). By scrutinizing the
       most conspicuous manifestation of right-wing conspiracism in the digital era, this article
       postulates a non-pathologizing conceptual toolkit for understanding how conspiracy
       theories arise, spread, and persist at the grassroots level.4
        Accordingly, the article begins with a critical assessment of the pathologizing analyti-
       cal vocabulary currently in use. It then employs three non-pathologizing conceptual
       counteroffers borrowed from critical theory, deconstructionist historiography, and citi-
       zenship studies – specifically, cognitive mapping, narrative emplotment, and performa-
       tive citizenship – to address this issue. Finally, it introduces two novel concepts that
       invite a sociological approach to conspiracism: first, epistemic communities of the unreal
       to designate the participatory, interactive, and decentralized nature of collaboratively
       creating unreal explanations of the real world; and second, grassroots conspiracism to
       denote the ways in which these bottom-up, horizontal, and collective meaning-making
       practices and knowledge-production processes are expanding spaces of and for politics.
       The Conspiracist Zeitgeist: Politicizing Knowledge ‘From
       Below’ in the Post-Political Condition of the Post-Truth
       Era                                                   
       The contestation of official knowledge has emerged as a critical concern in the ‘post-
       truth era’ (McIntyre, 2018; Zoglauer, 2023). Online actors are free to weaponize new
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      114                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      media technologies to propagate pseudoscientific ideas, foster anti-intellectual senti-
      ments, spread misinformation and disinformation, and create manipulated text, images,
      and statistics about major problems (Bradshaw and Howard, 2018; Woolley and Howard,
      2018). These actions obscure the factual verification of crucial socio-political challenges,
      rendering evidence less influential in shaping public opinion than appeals to personal
      emotions and beliefs (Dahlgren, 2018; Nichols, 2017). Moreover, the COVID-19 pan-
      demic has mainstreamed previously fringe debates on who decides what is true, on what
      grounds, and by what means (Birchall and Knight, 2023; Ringe and Rennó, 2023). The
      result was a unique global (dis)infodemic that transformed even ‘technical issues’ like
      mask-wearing and vaccination into matters of ideological disputes on personal freedoms,
      civil liberties, and human rights.                     
        This epistemic crisis coincided with the ‘post-political condition’ that exacerbates the
      political ramifications of such skepticism-turned-dissent. This condition is characterized
      by highly formalized procedures of representative democracy that effectively reduce
      political action to public administration and, through the delegation of authority to seem-
      ingly neutral experts who often legitimize the interests of the establishment, expunge
      numerous political issues from public debate (Crouch, 2004; Žižek, 1999). As elected
      officials and business interests influence politics beyond the scrutiny of the public, politi-
      cal activity becomes confined to the technocratic functions of administering social, eco-
      nomic, political, cultural, and other issues within parameters set by elite consensus
      (Brown, 2005; Rancière, 1999). Consequently, post-political societies become less
      receptive to radical ideas expressed through collective actions, leaving politics hollowed
      of its substance (Mair, 2013; Wilson and Swyngedouw, 2014). It is important to note that
      the democratic quality of these subversive ideologies and contentious actions coming
      ‘from below’ is dependent on a well-informed citizenry – a quality that has sharply
      declined during the COVID-19 (dis)infodemic.           
        Algorithm-driven ‘filter bubbles’, ‘feedback loops’, and ‘echo chambers’ within ideo-
      logically and epistemologically closed ‘communities of belief’ have created a politically
      charged ‘denial industry’ among ordinary people (Nichols, 2017; Rogers, 2023).
      Consequently, instead of functioning as the ‘marketplace of ideas’ – a utopian ideal in
      which ‘the truth’ emerges from the competition of different (evidence-based) opinions
      – social media has become a space where ‘alternative facts’ and ‘fake news’ circulate as
      truth-claims (Kim and Gil de Zúñiga, 2021; Smith and Wanless, 2020). When public
      debates are defined by ‘competing conceptions of the real’ (Dean, 1998: 24; see also
      Kużelewska and Tomaszuk, 2022), growing suspicion targets not only political elites but
      also scientific authorities. Within distrustful segments of society, ‘mainstream science’
      becomes viewed as equally corrupt, leading to its diminished ability to legitimize what
      counts as genuine knowledge and good policy among these demographics (Thompson,
      2008; Ylä-Anttila, 2018). The digital citizenship emerging from this radical doubt is
      characterized by a lack of confidence in scientific institutions, suspicion, if not outright
      rejection, of democratic dialogue with mainstream political actors, and an inclination
      towards adopting conspiracism as a worldview (Hellinger, 2019; Rosenblum and
      Muirhead, 2019). Hence, one could argue that the post-political condition of the post-
      truth era has ushered in a conspiracist zeitgeist, wherein personal emotions, perceptions,
      and beliefs serve as instruments in the (collective) quest for gnosis about conspiracies

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          115     
                                                             
       shaping our social world. The militant conviction that obtaining this esoteric knowledge
       is the sole path to the liberation of the people infuses highly politicized conspiracist con-
       tent into the post-political void.                    
        In summary, the gradual erosion of consensus on what was previously considered a
       shared reality has resulted in fragmented (political) unrealities. With ‘truth’ imagined as
       being hidden behind veils of deception and machinations of the establishment, it is
       unsurprising that right-wing conspiracism has become entrenched as an alternative mode
       of explanation for the non-transparent workings of the power elite – an idea which has
       traditionally been critiqued from the left as a structural problem of late capitalism.
       Grassroots conspiracism, exemplified by movements like QAnon, has proven to be a
       powerful vehicle for reflexive musings on ‘democratizing democracy’ in the post-politi-
       cal condition of the post-truth era. By recognizing the dissensus on what collective real-
       ity is, which only highlights inconsistencies in shared truths, conspiracists assert
       epistemic control about how the world works and articulate radically different political
       ideas about how it should work. Studying their symbolic, discursive, and material prac-
       tices as political – not pathological – is of utmost importance.
       The Three Stigmas of Conspiracist Ideation:           
       Psychopathology, Pseudoscience, Parapolitics          
       Throughout history, conspiracy theories have been regarded as legitimate means for
       interpreting reality within various segments of society (Butter, 2014), appealing to ‘both
       marginalized groups and the power elite’ (Melley, 2000: 7). By the end of the 20th cen-
       tury, however, there was a notable shift in public perception towards conspiracism, which
       came to be seen as an illegitimate form of knowledge (Thalmann, 2019). Despite its
       epistemic delegitimization, conspiracist narratives retained political relevance, remain-
       ing ‘many people’s normal way of thinking about who they are and how the world works’
       (Knight, 2000: 2). The rapid surge of populist politics in the past decade has witnessed
       the convergence of its key ideologemes, such as the ‘oppressed but moral people against
       the corrupt and self-serving elite’, with fundamental conspiracist tropes, thereby propel-
       ling conspiracism from the fringes of society into the public mainstream (Fenster, 2008;
       Hellinger, 2019).5 Given the recent relegitimization of conspiracy theories by right-wing
       populist politicians and their mainstream media mouthpieces, we can indeed speak of the
       conspiracist zeitgeist.                               
        Yet, must there not surely be something real that fuels this ‘culture of conspiracy’
       (Barkun, 2003; Knight, 2000; Melley, 2000)? We live in an age in which abuses of power
       by authority figures have effectively weakened the fabric of social trust, and repeated
       failure to correct ongoing ethical breaches makes it harder to rebuild. In recent decades,
       individuals like Julian Assange and Edward Snowden have brought to light numerous
       covert government activities. Before that, public disclosure of the US government-sup-
       ported programs such as MK-Ultra, COINTELPRO, and Operation Northwoods gave
       legitimacy to long-standing Cold War conspiracy theories about mind-control experi-
       ments, infiltration activities, and false flag operations (Melley, 2008; Olmsted, 2009;
       Willman, 2002). These cases demonstrate that, empirically speaking, it is implausible to
       argue that belief in conspiracy theories is entirely delusional (Brotherton, 2015; Coady,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      116                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      2006; Dentith, 2018).6 It is thus crucial to distinguish between conspiracies as ‘typical
      social phenomena’ (Popper, 2013: 307), as seen in these clandestine government opera-
      tions, and the idea of a ‘“vast” or “gigantic” conspiracy as the motive force in historical
      events’ (Hofstadter, 1996: 29), such as the narratives espoused by movements like
      QAnon. Nonetheless, despite the widespread presence of conspiracy beliefs across all
      societies and their capacity to transcend cultural barriers (Aaronovitch, 2010; Andrade,
      2020; Brotherton, 2015; West and Sanders, 2003), scholarly literature has predominantly
      framed conspiracist ideation in a pathologizing manner, resulting in its stigmatization on
      three main fronts: psychological, epistemological, and political.
        The first approach often diagnoses conspiratorial thinking using psychopathological
      vocabulary. For instance, the clinical framework of paranoia is frequently employed to
      explain the presence of conspiracy beliefs, even though the term was initially used figu-
      ratively to describe conspiracists’ Manichaean worldview (Hofstadter, 1996). The focus
      on how a delusional mind copes with and navigates an unfamiliar environment – or,
      more precisely, articulates the ‘fear of a nonexistent conspiracy’ (Pipes, 1997: 21) – has
      eventually established a relationship between conspiratorial thinking and paranoia ‘so
      strong that the two terms are now treated as almost synonymous’ (Byford, 2011: 121).
      This psychopathological association was further extended to encompass various types of
      conspiracy mentality, schizotypy, and even psychosis (Darwin et al., 2011; Galbraith,
      2021; Robins and Post, 1997). Despite facing frequent criticism for suggesting that vari-
      ous segments of society suffer from psychological issues, the ‘notion that there is some-
      thing mentally “wrong” (or at least deviating from “normal”) with conspiracy theorists is
      still widespread in these research traditions’ (Harambam, 2020: 15). This emphasis on
      psychological factors tends to detach conspiracist ideation from the nexus of social, cul-
      tural, and political dynamics that give rise to conspiracy theories, confining it to the clini-
      cal realm of personality traits, cognitive challenges, and mental disorders.
        The second approach highlights the pseudoscientific nature of conspiracy theories.
      Within this research tradition, conspiracy theories are treated as the secularized form of
      religious superstition, where the role of gods is replaced by ‘sinister pressure groups whose
      wickedness is responsible for all the evils we suffer from’ (Popper, 2013: 306). To maintain
      a ‘unified explanation’ accounting for the ‘ordered universe’ (Keeley, 1999: 119–23) –
      which is seen as ‘governed by design’ (Barkun, 2003: 3) – conspiracy theories exhibit three
      pseudoscientific traits: first, they are ‘highly selective both in their approach to evidence
      and in deciding what question they want to ask’ (Byford, 2011: 92); second, they ‘indis-
      criminately accept any argument that points to conspiracy’ (Pipes, 1997: 41); and third,
      they are ‘resistant and in extreme cases invulnerable to contrary evidence’ (Sunstein and
      Vermeule, 2009: 223). Conspiracists reject randomness, multicausality, complexity, falsifi-
      ability, verifiability, and plausibility, thereby introducing into their accounts unwarranted
      explanatory interventions that detach truth from knowledge (Barkun, 2003; Hristov, 2019;
      Keeley, 1999). However, as conspiracy theories mimic scientific scholarship (Barkun,
      2003; Byford, 2011; Pipes, 1997), it becomes challenging for the general public to ‘distin-
      guish between the scholarly and the slap-dash, the committed researcher and the careless
      loudmouth, the scrupulous and the demagogic’ (Aaronovitch, 2010: 334). This emphasis
      on conspiracy theories as quasi-religious ‘bad science’ – predicated upon ‘crippled episte-
      mology’ (Sunstein and Vermeule, 2009) – pathologizes not only ‘professional deceivers’

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          117     
                                                             
       who propagate them but also those who subscribe to and advocate for these theories, over-
       looking their intricate political appeal.             
        The third approach focuses solely on aspects of conspiracism that contravene modern
       political norms and their negative consequences, effectively delegitimizing conspiracism
       as a parapolitical phenomenon. Starting from the premise that ‘the most sincere and
       well-intentioned conspiracy theorists contribute to dangerous social dynamics of demoni-
       zation and scapegoating – dynamics which are toxic to democracy’ (Berlet, 2009: 7), this
       research tradition views conspiracism as a persistent (and often violence-fueling) threat
       to the democratic virtues of moderation, deliberation, and consensus (Berlet, 2009;
       Robins and Post, 1997; Sunstein and Vermeule, 2009). There is a widespread consensus
       that conspiracism ‘has been the staple ingredient of discriminatory, antidemocratic and
       populist politics, a trademark of the rhetoric of oppressive regimes’ (Byford, 2011: 144),
       consistently distorting the health of the body politic and contributing to nearly all the
       atrocities of the past century (Aaronovitch, 2010; Barkun, 2003; Pipes, 1997; Robins and
       Post, 1997). However, by disregarding the potential relevance of conspiracism in reflect-
       ing genuine grievances and articulating valid concerns, these stigmatizations – them-
       selves being ‘political statements reflecting particular interests’ (Melley, 2000: 13)
       – simply serve as a ‘means to enforce a normative definition of political belief and prac-
       tice’ (Fenster, 2008: 25). As a result, this approach reduces conspiracism to an irrational
       – and therefore always-already dangerous – antithesis of ‘good’ politics.
        The proposed depathologization-through-politicization does not indicate sympathy
       with conspiracists; instead, it involves the theoretical reframing of conspiracism at the
       grassroots level – ‘with whom the researchers shares neither political orientation nor
       way of life and whose politics and/or way of life are found objectionable’ (Esseveld
       and Eyerman, 1992: 217) – as a means to develop a conceptual toolkit to understand
       how conspiracists ‘make sense of the world regardless of the researcher’s own political
       alignment’ (Pilkington, 2016: 14; see also Ezekiel, 1995). While this theoretical recali-
       bration may eventually lead to politically and ethically uncomfortable research within
       an academic environment that harbors institutionalized distaste – if not outright ‘con-
       tagion of stigma’ – towards interpretivist, and thus mostly non-normative, approaches
       to ‘distasteful communities’ (Esseveld and Eyerman, 1992; Pilkington, 2016), it none-
       theless enhances ‘the capacity of qualitative research to adapt and develop with the
       research process’ (Pilkington, 2016: 34–5).7 Hence, to produce novel insights about the
       controversial subject in question, it is crucial, first, to approach the object of study, no
       matter how ‘distasteful’ it may be, ‘as it is found rather than as it is imagined’
       (Pilkington, 2016: 34–5); second, to diligently examine its manifestations as ‘they
       develop, by taking them seriously and rigorously analyzing their characteristics’
       (Bertuzzi, 2021: 11); and third, to recognize how the conflicts they generate ‘might
       also have a generative value and a power to strengthen social structures’ (Drążkiewicz,
       2023: 20). Drawing on scholarly calls for a serious academic examination of conspir-
       acy theories (Barkun, 2003; Bratich, 2008; Coady, 2006; Dentith, 2018; Harambam,
       2020) – particularly regarding how they resonate with the political environment and
       reflect social relations (Boltanski, 2014; Dean, 1998; Drążkiewicz, 2023; Fenster,
       2008) – I will continue to propose a conceptual toolkit for a sociology of conspiracy
       theorizing ‘from below’ in the digital age.           

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      118                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      Towards a Sociology of Grassroots Conspiracism:        
      Cognitive Mapping, Narrative Emplotment, Performative  
      Citizenship                                            
      From a strictly formal perspective, conspiracy theory operates similarly to any other
      social theory, by ‘[constructing] an ideologically coherent social reality rooted in social
      fantasy’ (Willman, 2002: 21). On a more substantive side, conspiracists’ ‘faith in the
      fundamental connectedness of everything’ is also evident in several other rational
      approaches to understanding the modern world, such as ‘epidemiology, ecology, risk
      theory, systems theory, complexity theory, theories of globalization, boosterism for the
      internet, and even poststructuralist literary theories about intertextuality’ (Knight, 2000:
      205). That is to say, until the scientific method unearths ‘some magically unmediated
      access to reality, conspiracy theory cannot simply be pathologized in one sweeping ges-
      ture’ (Melley, 2000: 13–14). But what about the process through which conspiracy theo-
      ries are produced – conspiracy theorizing? Before the digital era, these theories were
      primarily conveyed in a top-down and paternalistic manner by prominent conspiracists,
      treating them as final products for passive consumption by audiences. The advent of
      information and communication technologies has facilitated the continuous production,
      diffusion, and evaluation of conspiratorial ideas, tropes, and narratives ‘from below’
      (Mason, 2022; Rosenblum and Muirhead, 2019). Essentially, the social media revolution
      has democratized – and thus politicized – the very process of constructing conspiracy
      theories.                                              
        QAnon did not initially emerge as a cohesive conspiracy theory; rather, it was articu-
      lated in the tradition of fanfiction or, more accurately, enacted as an online narrative
      game with its own vernacular (Reinhard et al., 2021; Rothschild, 2021). From October
      2017 to December 2020, a person operating under the pseudonym Q, who claimed to be
      a top-secret government operative, posted cryptic clues – referred to by his followers as
      ‘Q-drops’ or ‘(bread)crumbs’ – on 4chan and subsequently other imageboards like
      8chan/8kun (see Figure 1).8 These posts indicated, in brief, that a cabal of Satan-
      worshiping and child-abusing elites runs the world through the nefarious ‘deep state’ and
      claimed that Donald Trump and his allies were working clandestinely to undermine this
      secret society (‘the coming storm’). Instead of providing a ready-made conspiracy the-
      ory, Q urged followers (‘the bakers’) to cease trusting authorities, especially the so-called
      experts, and encouraged them to ‘do their own research’ (Bloom and Moskalenko, 2021;
      Hughey, 2021). By pointing out that the cabal’s ‘need for symbolism will be their down-
      fall’, Q exposed symbols as the key ‘clue’ for his devotees to look for when attempting
      to uncover the deep state’s covert operations (Packer and Stoneman, 2021: 268; Sommer,
      2023). The emerging conspiracy theory was thus mainly the product of interpretative
      activities of Q’s disciples, where every sign became a symbol, each symbol carried
      meaning, and all meaning pointed toward a grand conspiracy scheme (‘dough’ or
      ‘bread’). The absence of any attribution of coincidence eventually transformed every-
      thing into a source of information on the workings of the cabal (‘red pill’). As Q’s mes-
      sage spread across social networking platforms, so did the doubts of his followers
      regarding the mechanisms – and, most importantly, the mainstream explanations – of
      their social reality. By the time Q stopped posting, the conspiracist imaginaries of his
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          119     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 1. An example of an early ‘Q-drop’ posted on the 4chan imageboard.
                                                             
       followers had been fully unleashed, becoming all-encompassing in its interpretive power
       (‘Q-awareness’).9                                     
        Emerging as a new collective actor on the public stage (‘Where we go one, we go
       all!’), QAnon utilized online spaces to proactively search for ‘hidden messages’, col-
       laboratively interpret and piece together scattered ‘conspiracy clues’, engage in ques-
       tion-and-answer exchanges, share ‘their own research findings’ for feedback, and
       network with like-minded individuals. Through hermeneutic and evaluative processes,
       unified through a hivemind storytelling approach, numerous participants provided con-
       nective tissue to ‘Q-drops’ and other ‘crumbs’, thereby constituting a distinct epistemic
       community of the unreal.10 Over time, a novel conspiracy theory began to unravel glob-
       ally, adapting itself to the socio-political context in which it was (re)interpreted, often
       acquiring distinct local socio-cultural characteristics (Butter and Knight, 2023; Jones,
       2023; Sommer, 2023).11 By reaching conclusions on their own and through interactions
       with their peers, every new ‘discovery’ about and for the cause instilled a sense of impor-
       tance, influence, and competence in each member of QAnon, thereby giving rise to
       grassroots conspiracism. Despite the failure of any of Q’s predictions to materialize, his
       followers persevered in retrospectively crafting a satisfying narrative that provided new-
       found credibility to their ideas and beliefs (‘trust the plan’) (Hughey, 2021; Packer and
       Stoneman, 2021).12 For instance, they referred to the COVID-19 pandemic as ‘the
       Plandemic’ and ‘COVID-1984’, depicting it as a carefully planned hoax orchestrated by
       the cabal to restrict personal freedoms, stifle popular dissent, and usher in a new world
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      120                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      order – a narrative that strongly resonated with scared and resentful individuals around
      the world.                                             
        Considering these basic features of QAnon, I contend that the three pathologizing
      analytical frameworks lack the capacity to account for the collective nature of conspiracy
      theorizing and fail to recognize the global appeal of conspiracism in the digital age
      (Bertuzzi, 2021; Bloom and Moskalenko, 2021; Butter and Knight, 2023; Sommer,
      2023). Therefore, I propose non-pathologizing alternatives drawn from the works of
      Fredric Jameson, Hayden White, and Engin Isin as politicizing conceptual counteroffers
      to these approaches.                                   
      Seeing Like a Conspiracist: Conspiratorial Thinking as Cognitive Mapping
                                                             
      As a symbolic practice through which individuals orientate themselves not only in geo-
      graphical but also ideological space, cognitive mapping entails a ‘practical reconquest of a
      sense of place’ within and of a ‘vaster and properly unrepresentable totality’ (Jameson,
      1991: 51). In the fragmented media landscape of the pandemic, the ideological problemati-
      zation of information validity has increasingly diminished its practical utility, resulting in a
      growing sense of disorientation in everyday experience, both epistemically and politically.
      This feeling is akin to being lost in a postmodern hyperspace – a realm that ‘[transcends] the
      capacities of the individual human body to locate itself, to organize its immediate surround-
      ings perceptually, and cognitively to map its position in a mappable external world’
      (Jameson, 1991: 44). In an era where the credibility of official institutions to legitimize what
      constitutes scientific knowledge and sound policy becomes a subject of public controversies
      and social disputes, perplexed individuals often find themselves in situations where they no
      longer know with complete certainty what is true, nor whom to trust. This confusion has led
      many to turn to alternative, radical, and often anti-mainstream explanations of their epis-
      temically dubious and politically uncertain reality (Birchall and Knight, 2023; Kużelewska
      and Tomaszuk, 2022). By embracing epistemic standpoints with radically different perspec-
      tives on the social world, conspiratorial thinking has demonstrated its effectiveness in trans-
      lating this prevailing suspicion into individual and collective agency.
        On one hand, conspiracists strongly believe that their voices are excluded from the
      public mainstream as part of a conspiracy to silence them for ‘speaking truth to power’;
      on the other hand, their acts of challenging the validity of the ‘official truth’ through
      crowdsourcing activities give rise to a conspiracist counterpublic. While QAnon’s col-
      lective efforts create a symbolic toolkit for representing an imagined reality, its decen-
      tralized structure enables its more passive adherents – who personally endorse its key
      ideas but often merely observe without directly engaging in collaborative storytelling –
      to autonomously reinterpret, deconstruct, and reconstruct ‘Q-drops’ into personalized
      tools for charting the social world as experienced from the epistemic margins of the
      political fringe. Driven by the ‘desire called cognitive mapping’ (Jameson, 1992: 3),
      conspiracists alleviate their unease with the mainstream accounts of reality by creating
      simple – but not simplistic – cartographies that reveal power relations within their phe-
      nomenological (un)reality. Accordingly, this conspiratorial mapping facilitates the pro-
      jection of people, places, things, associations, and events into idiosyncratic symbolic
      frameworks that represent the imagined social environment, thereby enabling
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          121     
                                                             
       individuals to ‘think a system so vast that it cannot be encompassed by the natural and
       historically developed categories of perception with which human beings normally ori-
       ent themselves’ (Jameson, 1992: 2). Through exchanges with like-minded peers, con-
       spiracists find themselves situated on their own cognitive maps of this open-source
       unreality: epistemically as ‘those who know what is transpiring’ and politically as ‘those
       who act upon this knowledge’.                         
        In this regard, conspiratorial thinking is not merely a product of ‘delusional minds’
       coping with the ‘fear of a nonexistent conspiracy’. Instead, it exemplifies yearning for
       epistemic reorientation and political disalienation in the post-political condition of the
       post-truth era. For example, in (re)charting the COVID-19 pandemic into the ‘Plandemic’,
       conspiracists symbolically bridge the rift ‘between existential experience and scientific
       knowledge’ through invention of ways for ‘articulating those two distinct dimensions
       with each other’ (Jameson, 1991: 53). By focusing solely on elements and relations rel-
       evant to the map’s political purpose, the cartographic minimalism of QAnon’s conspira-
       torial mapping transforms a non-transparent, complex, and often chaotic reality into a
       relatively straightforward representation. This symbolic unification of fragmented expe-
       riences restores a sense of epistemic certainty and political empowerment to individuals
       endowed with ‘Q-awareness’. It effectively becomes a ‘code word for [a new kind of]
       “class consciousness”’ (Jameson, 1991: 418), particularly evident in QAnon’s interac-
       tions with out-groups. Nevetheless, the ‘do it yourself’ philosophy underlying grassroots
       conspiracism prevents blind adherence to the official narrative canonized by the epis-
       temic community of the unreal. Instead, it encourages an intimate relationship with truth,
       allowing personalized knowledge to modify the conspiracist narrative, albeit within the
       ideological constraints that ensure communal belonging; conversely, a radically different
       cognitive map gives rise to a new conspiracy theory. These instances of dissent regarding
       the ‘hidden truth’ – such as viewing COVID-19 as a bioweapon rather than a hoax – not
       only foster a sense of epistemic credibility among QAnon adherents but also enable them
       to signal political autonomy within their respective counterpublics.
        In summary, although some psychological factors may predispose certain personali-
       ties to embrace conspiracy beliefs, reducing conspiratorial thinking to a mental issue
       overlooks its personal significance for those who use it to cognitively chart their phe-
       nomenological (un)reality in the post-political condition of the post-truth era. By scruti-
       nizing why and how various political, cultural, and social resources are employed to
       establish imaginary connections between unrelated elements into internally meaningful
       patterns offers insights into the cartographic epistemology of conspiracist ideation.
       Conspiratorial mapping is thus a symbolic practice for navigating and overcoming a
       sense of epistemic-cum-political disorientation through the establishment of fictional
       relationships between individuals and their environment, which can then be further
       explored and developed through collective conspiracy theorizing.
       Speaking Like a Conspiracist: Conspiracy Theorizing as Narrative
       Emplotment                                            
       As a discursive practice through which historiographical accounts gain their explanatory
       power, narrative emplotment designates the agency of historians – or, conversely, of any
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      122                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      historical storytellers – to compose, in more or less conscious ways, a coherent and
      meaningful story. Events in and of themselves provide no inherent motivation for a par-
      ticular coding, so every historical account, through the careful ‘selection and arrange-
      ment of data from the unprocessed historical record in the interest of rendering that
      record more comprehensible to an audience of a particular kind’, becomes a narrative
      imposition on and narrative rendering of the past (White, 1973: 5). This quality of being
      empirical and speculative at the same time positions historiography as an art as much as
      a science – an ‘ideological construct’ that is ‘constantly being re-worked and re-ordered
      by all those who are variously affected by power relationships’ (Jenkins, 2004: 21).
      Similarly, conspiracy theorizing employs political and poetical elements in (re)interpret-
      ing and (re)constructing past events into contingent forms of coherence, unified by a plot
      structure that serves a specific ideological purpose.  
        Like other narrative forms of explanation, conspiracy theories are also organized
      through ‘culturally provided categories, such as metaphysical concepts, religious beliefs,
      or story forms’, aiming to ‘familiarize the unfamiliar’ (White, 1978: 86). The platformi-
      zation and gamification of conspiracy theorizing have enabled conspiracists to harness
      collaborative means of figurative encoding and to collectively create narrative emplot-
      ments. Through deliberative processes and joint initiatives of deconstructing conven-
      tional knowledge and establishing counternarratives – where, understandably, not all
      contributions carry equal weight – QAnon employs multiple symbolic toolkits and dis-
      cursive strategies to devise conspiratorial emplotment. By reconciling ‘the collective
      and the epistemological’ (Jameson, 1992: 9), the resulting narrative validates a preferred
      political standpoint, irrespective of its factual accuracy. Conspiracy theories, therefore,
      do not simply mimic scientific epistemology; they are grounded in mobilization of coun-
      terknowledge – or, better yet, ‘stigmatized knowledge’ (Barkun, 2003) – that challenges
      accepted ‘epistemic authority by advocating alternative knowledge authorities’ (Ylä-
      Anttila, 2018: 358–9). These non-mainstream sources and rejected forms of knowledge
      are considered uncorrupted and genuine within the epistemic communities of the unreal
      (McIntyre, 2018; Thompson, 2008). Ultimately, collective narrativization ideologically
      validates numerous individual representations: while ‘Q-drops’ may serve as the raw
      materials for individual-level conspiratorial mapping of the imagined reality, their
      explanatory value is fully realized once they are collectively woven into a political nar-
      rative that provides QAnon with a collective identity. 
        Just as the ideology and aesthetics of narrative emplotment shape historiographical
      accounts (Jenkins, 2004; White, 1973, 1978), QAnon’s symbolic and discursive prac-
      tices fuse historical and fictitious events – or, more precisely, the realities of past and
      current events and their semantic positioning within the ideological framework – into a
      story that blurs conventional dichotomies of proof and figuration, thus challenging dis-
      tinctions between fact and fiction. It is through these ‘curious leap[s] in imagination’
      made ‘at some critical point in the recital of events’ (Hofstadter, 1996: 37) that evidence
      and non-evidence are interwoven into a narrative, aiming to reveal a particular ‘hidden
      history’ that simultaneously legitimizes the ‘secret present’. For instance, ‘the Plandemic’
      was conveniently interpreted as yet another deep state scheme designed to prevent the
      president of the US and his allies from liberating the country – and, in some accounts,
      even the world itself – from the clutches of the satanic cabal. However, the inherently

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          123     
                                                             
       collaborative nature of conspiracy theorizing within the epistemic communities of the
       unreal inevitably leads to internal disputes over the meaning of ‘clues’, thereby expand-
       ing the space of and for politics. Varied ideological beliefs, political positions, geograph-
       ical locations, personal preferences, conspiracy maps, and other variables inform diverse
       and, at times, even contradictory conspiratorial emplotments within QAnon – such as
       viewing COVID-19 as both a hoax and a bioweapon simultaneously. These semantic
       disputes over ‘Q-drops’ and their intertextual position in relation to other ‘crumbs’ and
       cultural artifacts have fostered the emergence of numerous factions within QAnon and
       spawned its offshoots globally (Butter and Knight, 2023; Jones, 2023; Sommer, 2023).13
       Nevertheless, conspiracists’ unwavering commitment to the overarching conspiratorial
       plot grants political identity to an epistemic community of the unreal. Through crowd-
       sourced storytelling – which facilitates the actual process of conspiracy theorizing within
       these communities – personal beliefs, shared perspectives, conspiracy rumors, historical
       (non-)events, empirical (non-)evidence, conspiracist mythology, popular culture, and
       other fragments are interwoven into a (political) story that simultaneously functions as a
       (conspiracy) theory.                                  
        In summary, while conspiracy theorizing emulates scientific discourse, it is not neces-
       sarily employed with the intent of deliberately creating disinformation. Instead, in the
       post-political condition of the post-truth era, conspiracists use remarkable imaginative
       abilities to fill gaps in data and construct compelling narratives that offer gratifying solu-
       tions to intricate political problems, which often lack straightforward or definitive
       answers. Differentiating between moral and epistemic relativism prevents oversimplifi-
       cation of conspiracy theories as intentionally deceptive pseudoscientific accounts lack-
       ing value due to their strategic falsehoods. Conversely, viewing them as post-factual
       counternarratives challenging the dominant épistémè – framed by their proponents as
       ‘untainted by the corrupt elites’ and thus considered to be made ‘for the people, by the
       people’ – aids in better understanding why and how various segments of society engage
       in conspiracy theorizing to articulate legitimate concerns and express authentic griev-
       ances, thereby rendering conspiracism a political phenomenon par excellence.
       Acting Like a Conspiracist: Conspiracism as Performative Citizenship
       In scholarly literature, political subjectivity is often attributed to active citizens: virtuous
       members of society who remain proactive in public life between elections. Various terms
       – such as ‘radical’ (Mouffe, 1993), ‘monitorial’ (Schudson, 1998), and ‘critical’ (Norris,
       2011), among others – have been used to describe how and to what extent these citizens
       exercise their agency outside of conventional political channels. When citizens are col-
       lectively and contentiously ‘exercising, claiming, and performing rights and duties’, they
       ‘creatively transform [citizenship’s] meanings and functions’ (Isin, 2017: 502), shifting
       it from a predefined legal condition into a performative political action that ‘disrupts
       already defined orders, practices and statuses’ (Isin, 2009: 384). As it has been demon-
       strated that conspiracy theories often articulate a desire for individual agency and demo-
       cratic participation (Bratich, 2008; Dean, 1998; Fenster, 2008), it is unsurprising that
       conspiracism is increasingly being expressed through various forms of performative citi-
       zenship in the post-political condition of the post-truth era (Birchall and Knight, 2023;
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      124                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      Rothschild, 2021). More than any other instance of grassroots conspiracism, QAnon has
      established itself as a recognizable political actor on the global stage not only by reject-
      ing traditional norms and conventional forms of liberal politics – especially the princi-
      ples of deliberation and moderation in reaching consensus – but also by embracing
      radical and militant ways of ‘doing politics’.         
        Despite attracting mainstream attention for challenging principles of ‘good citizen-
      ship’ – sometimes even earning the label of a ‘fascist cult’ – QAnon’s significance lies in
      its questioning of the structural and cultural parameters of the political community it
      inhabits. The infamous storming of the US Capitol, which showcased its zealous convic-
      tion and extremist methods aimed at ‘saving democracy from the clutches of the deep
      state’, serves as evidence of its uncompromising ambition to reorder the political land-
      scape itself. Nevertheless, while historically significant, these headline-grabbing upris-
      ings mark a notable departure from less eventful instances of activism and everyday acts
      of resistance through which QAnon primarily performs its political subjectivity across
      the globe (Jones, 2023; Sommer, 2023). During the pandemic, for instance, QAnon
      found various avenues to exercise its agency by contesting scientific expertise and the
      rule of law predicated upon it. Engaging in their own ‘research’ endowed its adherents
      with a sense of epistemic credibility, collectively translated into evidentiary politics
      aimed at uncovering the ‘hidden truth’ they believe is concealed by the ideological veil
      of ‘mainstream expertise’. Due to their perceived ownership of this gnosis, QAnon ada-
      mantly rejects any notion of insignificance. Its members often look down on the uniniti-
      ated (‘normies’) as indoctrinated individuals who blindly accept and reproduce what
      they have been taught (‘sheeple’), while priding themselves on being critical thinkers
      and responsible citizens engaged in a struggle for freedom, democracy, and truth.
        In response to public reprimands for promoting ‘absurd but dangerous fantasies’, con-
      spiracism becomes political precisely to the extent that its adherents invoke higher prin-
      ciples to defend their cause and prove their competencies (Baća, 2022; Boltanski, 2014).
      When QAnon employs a combination of political populism filtered through conspiracist
      imaginary (Hellinger, 2019), and epistemic populism that ‘eschews expertise altogether
      and seeks knowledge in the “hearts” or experiences of the “common people”’ (Ylä-
      Anttila, 2018: 358), to define what is at stake and justify their positions regarding the
      ‘common good’, its post-factual argumentation becomes a de facto political statement.
      That is to say, in engaging with authorities on an equal footing during scenes of dispute,
      QAnon undergoes political subjectification, a process that entails citizens’ performative
      disidentification from existing political allegiances in pursuit of ‘common goals under
      new symbolic unifiers’ (Baća, 2023: 189–90).Through these acts of performative con-
      spiracism, conspiracists not only achieve an individual sense of political disalienation
      (Heins, 2007), but also cultivate a collective belief in moral righteousness for epistemi-
      cally debunking and politically defying an alleged conspiracy that threatens or under-
      mines the values they hold dear (Jones, 2023). Therefore, grassroots conspiracism is
      characterized not only by the social construction of (un)reality but also by politically
      acting upon it: not as pathologized individuals but as a politicized collective – a conspira-
      cist (counter)movement.                                
        In summary, while conspiracism may display certain parapolitical traits, it primarily
      constitutes an alternative, dissenting, and often radical mode of political practice

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          125     
                                                             
       Table 1. Summary of pathologizing and non-pathologizing perspectives on conspiracist
       ideation presented in the article.                    
                 Level of  Type of practice Pathologizing Non-pathologizing
                 commitment        approach  approach        
       Conspiratorial Personal Representation Psychopathology Cognitive mapping
       thinking  endorsement (symbolic)                      
                 (individual)                                
       Conspiracy Social involvement Narrativization Pseudoscience Narrative
       theorizing (relational) (discursive)  emplotment      
       Conspiracism Political Participation Parapolitics Performative
                 engagement (performative)   citizenship     
                 (collective)                                
                                                             
       stemming from profound distrust in one’s own political community. Pathologizing it not
       only excludes its grassroots manifestations from the normative boundaries of civil soci-
       ety but also obscures the empirical reality of actually existing civil societies. Like the
       diverse composition of the political arena, civil societies encompass a broader spectrum
       of actors beyond the progressive contributors to civic cultures and liberal regimes,
       including those deemed ‘uncivil’ and ‘distasteful’ (Baća, 2022; Kopecký and Mudde,
       2003). Therefore, in a world without a centralized, equally distributed, and universally
       accepted truth, where the power elite often decides which ideas are permissible, under-
       standing the political weight of conspiracism involves carefully examining why and how
       the structural problems of the system are personified into non-transparent and sinister
       workings of the alienated and dehumanized elite.      
       Conclusion: Explanation before Condemnation?          
       This article has examined QAnon – whose formal and substantive features have been
       refined to the basics for the sake of brevity and clarity – as a case-in-point for developing
       a novel conceptual framework to study conspiracy theorizing ‘from below’ within the
       digital public sphere. It argues that the cross-cultural appeal and worldwide presence of
       QAnon cannot be adequately explained using the pathologizing analytical tools currently
       at our disposal, especially when it comes to analyzing the ‘discursive practices that chan-
       nel, shape, incite and deploy conspiracy theories as meaningful’ (Bratich, 2008: 7).14
       Therefore, rather than reducing conspiratorial thinking to an individual mental issue,
       conspiracy theories to manipulative bad science, and conspiracism to dangerous parapo-
       litical behavior, this article proposes non-pathologizing conceptual alternatives that rec-
       ognize conspiratorial thinking as a practice of cognitive mapping, conspiracy theorizing
       as a practice of narrative emplotment, and conspiracism as a practice of performative
       citizenship (see Table 1). In doing so, it introduces two novel concepts that open avenues
       for a sociological approach to conspiracist ideation, showcasing how QAnon is simulta-
       neously articulated within epistemic communities of the unreal via participatory, interac-
       tive, and decentralized meaning-making practices and knowledge-production processes,
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      126                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      and enacted through grassroots conspiracism via bottom-up, horizontal, and collective
      political procedures.                                  
        Advancing this non-pathologizing shift involves carefully examining counterknowl-
      edge, counternarratives, counterdiscourses, counterpublics, counterspaces, and counter-
      movements arising from conspiracist ideation, aimed at understanding the ways in which
      the unreal of the outside feels quite real on the inside. Only by studying actual manifesta-
      tions of grassroots conspiracism, rather than relying on preconceived notions, can
      researchers truly comprehend why and how the social dynamics of the digital age are
      displacing meaning from the level of (primary) referentiality to that of (secondary) sig-
      nification and, in the process, (re)defining ‘collective lifestyles as a form of legitimate
      politics’ (Bertuzzi, 2021: 7). When information and communication technologies are
      transforming conspiracy theories into political praxis, taking stock of the conspiracist
      zeitgeist emerging in the post-political condition of the post-truth era is crucial. It does
      not indicate an era dominated by conspiracy theories, but rather one where conspiracy
      theorizing is widespread. Therefore, it is not a specific conspiracy theory that defines this
      condition, but instead the mainstreaming of the epistemic communities of the unreal and
      increased engagement in grassroots conspiracism.       
      Acknowledgements                                       
      This article has been a long time in the making, primarily developed as a side-project during the
      COVID-19 lockdowns. Its initial drafts were crafted during my postdoctoral research stays at the
      Max Weber Institute of Sociology at Heidelberg University (Re:constitution Fellowship) and the
      Art, Science, and Business Program at the Akademie Schloss Solitude (Solitude Fellowship). It
      was completed in its current form during my research fellowship at the Corvinus Institute for
      Advanced Studies at Corvinus University of Budapest. I am grateful to all participants who pro-
      vided constructive criticism during colloquia, seminars, and workshops at these institutions. The
      article also greatly benefited from my research project funded by the European Union’s Horizon
      2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement no.
      897686, as well as from the national scientific research project grant funded by the Ministry of
      Education, Science, and Innovation of Montenegro. I am exceptionally grateful to the four anony-
      mous reviewers who provided invaluable comments and suggestions to improve the quality of the
      paper. I extend special appreciation to my outstanding students who participated in the course
      Populism, Pseudoscientism, and Conspiracism in the Age of Social Media at Heidelberg University;
      their questions, dilemmas, and insights inspired me to write this article. All errors and opinions
      expressed in this work are solely mine.                
      ORCID iD                                               
      Bojan Baća https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9844-0941       
      Notes                                                  
      1. For instance, between March and June 2020, during the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic,
        QAnon activity nearly tripled on Facebook and almost doubled on Twitter and Instagram
        (Gallagher et al., 2020), ultimately transforming what had previously been an online (sub)
        cultural obscurity – essentially, the Pizzagate conspiracy theory with a theological twist – into
        a mainstream political phenomenon (Rothschild, 2021).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          127     
                                                             
       2. As Ezekiel (1995: xx) succinctly explains, ‘I hate racism, which sunders the world I want to
         live in and harms great masses; but I have no trouble knowing that the racist is a comprehensi-
         ble human: we went to school together’. Despite its far-fetched core beliefs and the recycling
         of key antisemitic tropes and other far-right ideologemes, QAnon has demonstrated uncanny
         potential to radicalize reasonable people and, in the process, tear families apart (Rothschild,
         2021; Sommer, 2023).                                
       3. I use the adjective ‘conspiratorial’ to describe a tendency to casually believe in secret plots, and
         ‘conspiracist’ to refer to more systematic ideological adherence to conspiracist worldviews.
       4. While there are certain ideological asymmetries in conspiracist ideation, it is important to
         note that conspiracy theories are not primarily or solely the province of the (extreme) right-
         wing (Aaronovitch, 2010). They often resonate with the anti-institutional sentiments present
         across the ideological spectrum, particularly among segments of society that feel deprived of
         political control (Imhoff et al., 2022; Uscinski, 2018).
       5. Ever since the onset of the pandemic, research has consistently demonstrated a rise in belief
         in conspiracy theories, or at least in some of their aspects, as well as in conspiracy theoriz-
         ing on burning socio-political issues among the general public (Birchall and Knight, 2023;
         Gerstenfeld, 2021; Kużelewska and Tomaszuk, 2022)   
       6. Some scholars go even further, arguing that scholarly inquiry needs to differentiate between
         ‘demonstrably false conspiracy theories, such as the various 9/11 conspiracy theories’ and
         those ‘that are true or whose truth is undetermined’ (Sunstein and Vermeule, 2009: 206; see
         also Rosenblum and Muirhead, 2019).                 
       7. Despite its share of members who wish to maintain their privilege, QAnon also resonates with
         the ‘losers of globalization’. While ‘not all socio-economically and educationally disadvan-
         taged people take political paths that oppress the rights of others’, a researcher has to keep in
         mind ‘that does not take away their own disadvantage or make it unworthy of social research’
         (Pilkington, 2016: 34). Correspondingly, just like in the case of other social phenomena such
         as religious beliefs and populist worldviews, the proposed sociological approach does not
         delve into the meritum of their truthfulness. As Robertson (2017: 6) states, ‘like religion,
         conspiracy theory is whatever we say it is’, yet one epistemic standpoint is taken seriously
         while the other is denied the same privilege. Therefore, the focus should be placed on mean-
         ing-making practices and knowledge-production processes of conspiracism and, when they
         become a matter of political activism, on the ways in which they create ‘we’ that can radical-
         ize individuals (Bertuzzi, 2021; Bezalel, 2021; Robertson, 2017).
       8. Using forensic linguistics to analyze Q’s writing style, two teams of computer scientists iden-
         tified two prominent right-wing figures in the tech industry as the most likely individuals
         behind the Q moniker: Paul Furber, responsible for early posts, and Ron Watkins, who took
         over the account in 2018 (Kirkpatrick, 2022).       
       9. In June 2022, Q announced his return with a simple message on the 8 kun imageboard: ‘Shall
         we play a game once more?’                          
       10. The Q Origins Project houses an archive of over 15,000,000 QAnon posts.
       11. It is, therefore, pertinent to refer to heterogeneous (international) QAnon conspiracy theories
         rather than a monolithic (national) QAnon conspiracy theory.
       12. QAnon conspiracy theorizing involves heavy use of retcon (‘retroactive continuity’), a sto-
         rytelling device that alters previously established facts or events in a fictional narrative by
         introducing new information. This process resolves inconsistencies in a story’s continuity,
         updates narrative to fit a new storyline, and ultimately changes its meaning.
       13. While attributing truth to certain of Q’s revelations, some conspiracists view QAnon itself
         as a social movement that has been co-opted and instrumentalized by the very deep state it
         strives to counter (see, for example, Cat, 2022).   

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      128                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      14. For instance, the Vaccine Confidence Project approaches the lack of confidence in vaccines as a
        relational problem rooted in distrust. It attempts to address this issue by acknowledging the social
        epistemics of rumors, misinformation, and conspiracy theories that contribute to this hesitancy.
      References                                             
      Aaronovitch, David (2010) Voodoo Histories: The Role of the Conspiracy Theory in Shaping
        Modern History. New York: Riverhead Books.           
      Andrade, Gabriel (2020) Medical conspiracy theories: Cognitive science and implications for eth-
        ics. Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy 23(3): 505–518.
      Baća, Bojan (2022) Practice theory and postsocialist civil society: Toward a new analytical frame-
        work. International Political Sociology 16(1): 1–21. 
      Baća, Bojan (2023) Enacting resistance, performing citizenship: Trajectories of political subjecti-
        fication in the post-democratic condition. Sociology 57(1): 175–193.
      Barkun, Michael (2003) A Culture of Conspiracy: Apocalyptic Visions in Contemporary America.
        Berkeley: University of California Press.            
      Berlet, Chip (2009) Toxic to Democracy: Conspiracy Theories, Demonization and Scapegoating.
        Somerville, MA: Political Research Associates.       
      Bertuzzi, Niccolò (2021) Conspiracy theories and social movements studies: A research agenda.
        Sociology Compass 15(12): 1–16.                      
      Bezalel, Glenn Y. (2021) Conspiracy theories and religion: Reframing conspiracy theories as bliks.
        Episteme 18(4): 674–692.                             
      Birchall, Clare and Knight, Peter (2023) Conspiracy Theories in the Time of Covid-19. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Bloom, Mia and Moskalenko, Sophia (2021) Pastels and Pedophiles: Inside the Mind of QAnon.
        Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.             
      Boltanski, Luc (2014) Mysteries and Conspiracies: Detective Stories, Spy Novels and the Making
        of Modern Societies. Cambridge: Polity.              
      Bradshaw, Samantha and Howard, Philip N. (2018) Challenging Truth and Trust: A Global
        Inventory of Organized Social Media Manipulation. Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute.
      Bratich, Jack Z. (2008) Conspiracy Panics: Political Rationality and Popular Culture. New York:
        State University of New York Press.                  
      Brotherton, Rob (2015) Suspicious Minds: Why We Believe Conspiracy Theories. London:
        Bloomsbury Publishing.                               
      Brown, Wendy (2005) Edgework: Critical Essays on Knowledge and Politics. Princeton, NJ:
        Princeton University Press.                          
      Butter, Michael (2014) Plots, Designs and Schemes: American Conspiracy Theories from the
        Puritans to the Present. Boston, MA: De Gruyter.     
      Butter, Michael and Knight, Peter (eds) (2023) Covid Conspiracy Theories in Global Perspective.
        London: Routledge.                                   
      Byford, Jovan (2011) Conspiracy Theories: A Critical Introduction. Basingstoke: Palgrave
        Macmillan.                                           
      Cat, Michael J. (2022) QAnon & the #Pizzagates of Hell: Unreal Tales of Occult Child Abuse by
        the CIA. Chicago: Trine Day.                         
      Coady, David (ed) (2006) Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate. Aldershot: Ashgate.
      Crouch, Colin (2004) Post-Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Dahlgren, Peter (2018) Media, knowledge and trust: The deepening epistemic crisis of democracy.
        Javnost – The Public 25(1–2): 20–27.                 

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          129     
                                                             
       Darwin, Hannah, Neave, Nick, and Holmes, Joni (2011) Belief in conspiracy theories: The role of
         paranormal belief, paranoid ideation and schizotypy. Personality and Individual Differences
         50(8): 1289–1293.                                   
       Dean, Jodi (1998) Aliens in America: Conspiracy Cultures from Outerspace to Cyberspace. Ithaca,
         NY: Cornell University Press.                       
       Dentith, Matthew R.X. (ed) (2018) Taking Conspiracy Theories Seriously. London: Rowman and
         Littlefield.                                        
       Drążkiewicz, Elżbieta (2023) Are you with us or against us? Studying conflicts over conspiracy
         theories and overcoming the great conspiratorial divide. Anthropology in Action 30(1): 12–23.
       Esseveld, Johanna and Eyerman, Ron (1992) Which side are you on? Reflections on methodologi-
         cal issues in the study of ‘distasteful’ social movements. In: Mario Diani & Ron Eyerman
         (eds) Studying Collective Action. London: Sage, pp. 217–237.
       Ezekiel, Raphael S. (1995) The Racist Mind: Portraits of American Neo-Nazis and Klansmen.
         New York: Penguin Books.                            
       Fenster, Mark (2008) Conspiracy Theories: Secrecy and Power in American Culture. Revised and
         updated edition. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
       Galbraith, Niall (2021) Delusions and pathologies of belief: Making sense of conspiracy beliefs via
         the psychosis continuum. In: Valentina Cardella & Amelia Gangemi (eds) Psychopathology
         and Philosophy of Mind: What Mental Disorders Can Tell Us About Our Minds. New York:
         Routledge, pp. 117–144.                             
       Gallagher, Aoife, Davey, Jacob, and Hart, Mackenzie (2020) The Genesis of a Conspiracy Theory:
         Key Trends in QAnon Activity since 2017. London: Institute for Strategic Dialogue.
       Gerstenfeld, Manfred (2021) Conspiracy theories are an integral part of Western culture. BESA
         Center Perspectives Paper 1905: 1–4.                
       Giddens, Anthony (2002) Runaway World: How Globalization is Reshaping our Lives. London:
         Profile Books.                                      
       Haas, Peter M. (1992) Epistemic communities and international policy coordination. International
         Organization 46(1): 1–35.                           
       Harambam, Jaron (2020) Contemporary Conspiracy Culture: Truth and Knowledge in an Era of
         Epistemic Instability. London: Routledge.           
       Hellinger, Daniel C. (2019) Conspiracies and Conspiracy Theories in the Age of Trump. Cham,
         Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.                    
       Heins, Volker (2007) Critical theory and the traps of conspiracy thinking. Philosophy & Social
         Criticism 33(7): 787–801.                           
       Hochschild, Arlie Russell (2016) Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the
         American Right. New York: The New Press.            
       Hofstadter, Richard (1996) The Paranoid Style in American Politics and Other Essays. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University Press.                       
       Hristov, Todor (2019) Impossible Knowledge: Conspiracy Theories, Power, and Truth. London:
         Routledge.                                          
       Hughey, Matthew W. (2021) The who and why of QAnon’s rapid rise. New Labor Forum 30(3):
         76–87.                                              
       Imhoff, Roland, et al. (2022) Conspiracy mentality and political orientation across 26 countries.
         Nature Human Behaviour 6(3): 392–403.               
       Isin, Engin F. (2009) Citizenship in flux: The figure of the activist citizen. Subjectivity 29: 367–
         388.                                                
       Isin, Engin F. (2017) Performative citizenship. In: Ayelet Shachar, Rainer Bauböck, Irene
         Bloemraad, & Maarten Vink (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Citizenship. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press, pp. 500–523.                      

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      130                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      Jameson, Fredric (1991) Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London:
        Verso.                                               
      Jameson, Fredric (1992) The Geopolitical Aesthetic: Cinema and Space in the World System.
        Bloomington: Indiana University Press.               
      Jenkins, Keith (2004) Re-thinking History. London: Routledge.
      Jennings, Will, Stoker, Gerry, Valgarðsson, Viktor, and Devine, Daniel, et al. (2021) How trust,
        mistrust and distrust shape the governance of the COVID-19 crisis. Journal of European
        Public Policy 28(8): 1174–1196.                      
      Jones, Callum (2023) ‘We the people, not the sheeple’: QAnon and the transnational mobilisation
        of millennialist far-right conspiracy theories. First Monday 28(3): 1–19.
      Keeley, Brian L. (1999) Of conspiracy theories. The Journal of Philosophy 96(3): 109–126.
      Kim, Jeong-Nam and Gil de Zúñiga, Homero (2021) Pseudo-information, media, publics, and the
        failing marketplace of ideas: Theory. American Behavioral Scientist 65(2): 163–179.
      Kirkpatrick, David D. (2022) Who is behind QAnon? Linguistic detectives find fingerprints. New
        York Times, 19 February. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/19/technology/
        qanon-messages-authors.html (accessed 25 May 2024).  
      Knight, Peter (2000) Conspiracy Culture: From Kennedy to The X Files. London: Routledge.
      Kopecký, Petr and Mudde, Cas (2003) Rethinking civil society. Democratization 10(3): 1–14.
      Kużelewska, Elżbieta and Tomaszuk, Mariusz (2022) Rise of conspiracy theories in the pandemic
        times. International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 35(6): 2373–2389.
      Mair, Peter (2013) Ruling the Void: The Hollowing of Western Democracy. London: Verso.
      Mason, Paul (2022) How to Stop Fascism: History, Ideology, Resistance. London: Allen Lane.
      McIntyre, Lee (2018) Post-Truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Melley, Timothy (2000) Empire of Conspiracy: The Culture of Paranoia in Postwar America.
        Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.                
      Melley, Timothy (2008) Brainwashed! Conspiracy theory and ideology in the postwar United
        States. New German Critique 35(1): 145–164.          
      Meyer, Morgan and Molyneux-Hodgson, Susan (2010) The dynamics of epistemic communities.
        Sociological Research Online 15(2): 109–115          
      Mouffe, Chantal (1993) The Return of the Political. London: Verso.
      Nichols, Thomas M. (2017) The Death of Expertise: The Campaign Against Established Knowledge
        and Why It Matters. New York: Oxford University Press.
      Norris, Pippa (2011) Democratic Deficit: Critical Citizens Revisited. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.                                    
      Olmsted, Kathryn S. (2009) Real Enemies: Conspiracy Theories and American Democracy, World
        War I to 9/11. New York: Oxford University Press.    
      Packer, Joseph and Stoneman, Ethan (2021) Where we produce one, we produce all: The platform
        conspiracism of QAnon. Cultural Politics 17(3): 255–278.
      Philipp-Mullera, Aviva, Leeb, Spike W.S., and Petty, Richard E. (2022) Why are people antisci-
        ence, and what can we do about it? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119(30):
        1–10.                                                
      Pilkington, Hilary (2016) Loud and Proud: Passion and Politics in the English Defence League.
        Manchester: Manchester University Press.             
      Pipes, Daniel (1997) Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where it Comes From.
        New York: The Free Press.                            
      Popper, Karl (2013) The Open Society and its Enemies, 1 vol. edn. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.                                    
      Rancière, Jacques (1999) Disagreement: Politics and Philosophy. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Baća                                          131     
                                                             
       Reinhard, CarrieLynn D., Stanley, David, and Howell, Linda (2021) Fans of Q: The stakes of
         QAnon’s functioning as political fandom. American Behavioral Scientist 66(8): 1152–1172.
       Ringe, Nils and Rennó, Lucio (eds) (2023) Populists and the Pandemic: How Populists Around the
         World Responded to COVID-19. New York: Routledge.   
       Robertson, David G. (2017) The hidden hand: Why religious studies need to take conspiracy theo-
         ries seriously. Religion Compass 11(3–4): 1–8.      
       Robins, Robert S. and Post, Jerrold M. (1997) Political Paranoia: The Psychopolitics of Hatred.
         London: Yale University Press.                      
       Rogers, Richard (ed) (2023) The Propagation of Misinformation in Social Media: A Cross-
         Platform Analysis. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
       Rosenblum, Nancy L. and Muirhead, Russell (2019) A Lot of People Are Saying: The New
         Conspiracism and the Assault on Democracy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
       Rothschild, Mike (2021) The Storm is Upon Us: How QAnon Became a Movement, Cult, and
         Conspiracy Theory of Everything. New York: Melville House.
       Schudson, Michael (1998) The Good Citizen: A History of American Civic Life. New York: The
         Free Press.                                         
       Smith, Victoria and Wanless, Alicia (2020) Unmasking the Truth: Public Health Experts, the
         Coronavirus, and the Raucous Marketplace of Ideas. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment
         for International Peace.                            
       Sommer, Will (2023) Trust the Plan: The Rise of QAnon and the Conspiracy that Unhinged
         America. New York: Harper.                          
       Sunstein, Cass R. and Vermeule, Adrian (2009) Conspiracy theories: Causes and cures. Journal of
         Political Philosophy 17(2): 202–227.                
       Thalmann, Katharina (2019) The Stigmatization of Conspiracy Theory since the 1950s: ‘A Plot to
         Make Us Look Foolish’. London: Routledge.           
       Thompson, Damian (2008) Counterknowledge: How we Surrendered to Conspiracy Theories,
         Quack Medicine, Bogus Science and Fake History. London: Atlantic Books.
       Thompson, Michael J. and Smulewicz-Zucker, Gregory R. (eds) (2018) Anti-Science and the
         Assault on Democracy: Defending Reason in a Free Society. New York: Prometheus Books.
       Uscinski, Joseph E. (ed.) (2018) Conspiracy Theories and the People Who Believe Them. Oxford:
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Uscinski, Joseph E. and Parent, Joseph M. (2014) American Conspiracy Theories. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       West, H.G. and Sanders, T. (eds) (2003) Transparency and Conspiracy: Ethnographies of
         Suspicion in the New World Order. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
       White, Hayden (1973) Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe.
         Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.          
       White, Hayden (1978) Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural Criticism. Baltimore: Johns
         Hopkins University Press.                           
       Willman, Skip (2002) Spinning paranoia: The ideologies of conspiracy and contingency in post-
         modern Culture. In: Peter Knight (ed.) Conspiracy Nation: The Politics of Paranoia in
         Postwar America. New York: New York University Press, pp. 21–39.
       Wilson, Japhy and Swyngedouw, Erik (eds) (2014) The Post-Political and Its Discontents: Spaces
         of Depoliticisation, Spectres of Radical Politics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
       Woolley, Samuel C. and Howard, Philip N. (eds) (2018) Computational Propaganda: Political
         Parties, Politicians, and Political Manipulation on Social Media. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Ylä-Anttila, Tuukka (2018) Populist knowledge: ‘Post-truth’ repertoires of contesting epistemic
         authorities. European Journal of Cultural and Political Sociology 5(4): 356–388.

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      132                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(4)
                                                             
      Žižek, Slavoj (1999) The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology. London:
        Verso.                                               
      Zoglauer, Thomas (2023) Constructed Truths: Truth and Knowledge in a Post-truth World.
        London: Springer.                                    
      Zuckerman, Ethan (2019) QAnon and the emergence of the unreal. Journal of Design and Science
        6: 1–15.                                             
      Bojan Baća is a Research Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Studies (INS), University of
      Montenegro, and a Non-Resident Research Fellow at the Corvinus Institute for Advanced Studies
      (CIAS), Corvinus University of Budapest. Until recently, he held a Marie Skłodowska-Curie
      Fellowship at the Department of Sociology and Work Science, University of Gothenburg. His
      research has been published in a variety of scholarly outlets, including Sociology, Antipode,
      International Political Sociology, Political Geography, Europe-Asia Studies, and Südosteuropa
      Mitteilungen, among several others. In recognition of his contributions to the study of civil society,
      social movements, and contentious politics in Central and Eastern Europe, he was awarded the
      2022 Routledge Area Studies Interdisciplinarity Award. 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             