[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Article                                              
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2021,Vol.38(1)27–52
        White   Extinction:                                  
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2020
        Metaphysical    Elements                             
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
        of Contemporary                  sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276420925523
        Western    Fascism                 journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Chetan Bhatt                                         
        London Schoolof EconomicsandPoliticalScience         
                                                             
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        TheEuro-Americanfar-rightrepresentsahighlydiversepoliticalmovementcompris-
        ing numerous ideological tendencies. It includes the European New Right, the US
        ‘alt-right’ and ‘alt-lite’, far-right accelerationism, traditionalism, and new forms of
        political misogyny. Despite the diversity in ideas and activities, this article argues
        that an overarching theme of the ‘fear of white extinction’ travels across and ani-
        mateseachmajorcontemporaryfar-righttendency.Thearticleexploresavarietyof
        older and contemporary metaphysical themes that are deployed in contemporary
        fascism. These include new configurations of racism, occultist ideas of nature and
        vitalism,therenderingofcultureandcivilizationin‘biocultural’and‘anthropological’
        terms, and ideas about cosmic destiny. The article considers how older ideas from
        Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Hans Gu¨nther, Ludwig Klages, Arnold Gehlen and others
        are mobilized in contemporary fascism to generate a critique of liberal modernity,
        one which leads remorselessly to a logic of white supremacy and apocalyptic
        violence.                                            
        Keywords                                             
        alt-right, far-right, metaphysics, neo-Nazism, racism, white supremacy
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
                                                             
         We’venottheslightestyearningforthesocialworld:thestormsand
         omens of the Cosmos will suffice. (Ludwig Klages)   
                                                             
        If the 2016 US Presidential Election reminded us of the resilience of
        racism andwhitesupremacism intheUnitedStates,italsodemonstrated
        that white racial fascism has become re-vitalized for a new generation
        in North America, Brexit UK, Europe, Australia and New Zealand.
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:ChetanBhatt.Email:c.bhatt@lse.ac.uk
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      In recent years, the Western far-right has shown considerable political
      energy and multiple political forms. Its ideologies appear to be hetero-
      geneous and capricious, making it difficult to capture them within elem-
      entary descriptions of a core ideology or methods of organization.
        Despite this variety, this article aims to elaborate deeper metaphysical
      tendencies that underlie the superficial diversity of much of today’s far-
      right. The article focuses on some key themes in the political theology
      and eschatology of contemporary white racial fascism, themes which
      concern fascist metaphysics in its broadest sense. It draws eclectically
      on material from the European New Right and the US alt-right, and it
      links this material to older themes and ideological figures. Because the
      intellectual universe upon which the far-right draws is wide, I consider
      some emblematic writers that have influenced the European New Right
      and the US alt-right, including Julius Evola, Ludwig Klages, Hans
      Gu¨ nther and Arnold Gehlen.                           
        ‘White extinction’ is, I argue, a defining idea of the contemporary
      Western far-right. The ‘fear of white extinction’ unites virtually all
      European and North American far-right tendencies, despite the ideo-
      logical dissimilarities and conflicts between the alt-right, the alt-lite, the
      counter-jihad movement, among others. The idea of ‘white extinction’ is
      associated with several metaphysical themes that are important in con-
      temporary fascism: the rejection of abstract universals, the institution of
      occult naturalism and vitalism, the mobilization of folk anthropologies
      of culture, and ideas of cosmic destiny. These are linked in fascist think-
      ing and their logical progression is towards cleansing violence. Each of
      thesethemesgeneratesnewdimensionsofracismincontemporaryfascist
      thinking.                                              
        After briefly considering the ideological diversity within the contem-
      porary far-right, and the distinctions it makes between itself and ‘the
      false right’, I look at the deeper Nietzschean heritage upon which the
      far-rightdepends, includingtheways inwhich thefar-right rejects equal-
      ity, abstract knowledge and universal humanism. It is from these rejec-
      tions that a potent ‘biocultural’ form of racism emerges, one linked to a
      fascist metaphysics of nature. Fascist naturalism is a key ideological
      engine for racism. I therefore consider some older thinkers who supply
      powerful ideologies of nature’s vitalism. A complement to naturalism is
      the use by fascists of philosophical anthropology, also considered later.
      Metaphysicalthinkinghasconsequencesforcontemporaryfascistunder-
      standings of the actions to be taken in a period that fascists consider as
      presentingtheirbestopportunitysincetheendoftheSecondWorldWar
      (Andersen, 2018). Action is often linked to a cosmology of destiny that
      leads to a regressive logic of violence, a point elaborated in the
      conclusion.                                            
        The intellectual structures of contemporary fascism, as noxious, inco-
      herent or absurd as they are, nevertheless represent a sustained critique

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        29      
                                                             
        of liberal modernity, one that often aims to mimic progressive analyses
        (Griffin, 2000; Ferraresi, 1987; Bhatt, 2012). In developing the argu-
        ments, I have largely considered texts from tendencies associated with
        theEuropeanNewRight(Andersen,2018;DeBenoist,2011;Faye,2010,
        2011, 2016; Friberg, 2015; Generation Identity, 2013; Krebs, 2012;
        Venner, 2015; Willinger, 2013, 2014) and the US alt-right (such as
        Johnson, 2016, 2018; Anglin, 2016), but I have also considered related
        tendencies (Dugin, 2014; Donovan, 2012; Land, n.d.; Moldbug, 2008).
        The range of authors exemplify important ideological strands in the
        EuropeanNewRightandtheUSalt-right.Thefar-rightSwedishactivist
        JoakimAndersen’stext(2018)isoftenreferredtoasitillustratesimport-
        ant themes in the European New Right’s dominant world view. The
        former European New Right ideologue Guillaume Faye’s work presents
        a combative contrast to other ‘ethnopluralist’ positions. If the figures
        chosen lean towards the European New Right, it is because the latter
        represents the most sophisticated contemporary fascist project, one that
        has attempted to ideologically hegemonize the North American alt-right
        and move it towards ‘identitarian’ positions.        
         Whilethenarrativebelowrisksgivingasyntheticcoherencetofascism
        that does not (indeed, cannot) exist, it is fascism’s intrinsic ideological
        incoherencethatenergizesitsthinking.Ialsodonotmeantoevadesharp
        polarizations withthefar-right, suchasbetween thealt-right andalt-lite,
        or as evidenced by vicious quarrelling within the US alt-right or the
        European New Right. Nor do I want to ignore differing ideological
        tendenciesandtheirvariedlineages:theoriginsoftheinternationalcoun-
        ter-jihad movement, the neo-reactionaries and the traditionalists are dif-
        ferenttothoseofthealt-rightortheEuropeanNewRight.ButIhopeto
        showthat,despitethedifferencesbetweenaristocraticanddemoticforms
        of fascism today, they are animated by similar metaphysical structures
        and are part of the same essential political project, one that seeks to
        extinguish the entire ground of universal humanism, equality and liberal
        modernity.                                           
        Unity in Diversity                                   
        The extent of far-right ideological diversity indicates both vitality and
        volatility. If we pluck and group together ideas and symbols that hover
        around today’s far-right, we derive strikingly varied conceptual inven-
        tories.FromtheEuropeanNewRight–arisingfromtheformerNouvelle
        Droite, a key ideological engine for white identitarian and ‘ethnoplur-
        alist’ politics that emerged from the late 1960s – we get ideas about
        enrootedness, identity, ‘money-power’, ‘bioculture’, metapolitics, and a
        vitalistideaofthumosthatinvokesspiritedanger,actionandrecognition
        (Andersen, 2018). Elements of the far-right concerned with science, tech-
        nology and racial futures give us a conceptual list that includes
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      30                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      GuillaumeFaye’s‘archaeofuturism’(2010),NickLand,aformercultural
      studies academic, hyperventilating about the face tentacles of H.P.
      Lovecraft’s lumbering Cthulhu (Land, n.d.), human biodiversity,
      the artificial intelligence ‘technosingularity’, cameralism, Zombie
      Apocalypse, sea-steading, and ‘the Cathedral’ (Moldbug, 2008). Far-
      right trolls from 8chan and 4chan disseminated the puerile imagery of
      PepetheFrog,‘1488’,theKekreligion,cuckservativesandthelike.From
      its large, well-organized misogynist wings, we get ideas that include
      ‘game’, Ma¨nnerbund, the gang, Fight Club, sex between tribal men,
      incels, and men going their own way (MGTOW). The vast international
      counter-jihad movement delivers the symbolism of the Crusades, the
      Knights Templar, the ‘Gates of Vienna’ and the thousand-year war
      against Islam (Bhatt, 2012). From far-right ‘traditionalists’ we hear
      about the power and wisdom of Asatru, Odin, Baldur and Freyr
      (McNallen, 1985), organic orders, kshatriya warriors, the present, dismal
      age of Kaliyuga (Evola, 1995) and the impending doom of Ragnaro¨k
      (Von Schnurbein, 2016; Andersen, 2018), the latter two signifying a nar-
      rative of decline and catastrophe that travels across the far-right.
        The contemporary far-right contains many ideas about its racially
      homogeneous utopias: Eurasia (Dugin, 2014), Eurosiberia (Faye,
      2010), the Northwestern Territorial Imperative (http://northwestfront.
      org/), the white ethnostate (Gardell, 2003), the Proto-Indo European
      homeland (De Benoist, 2016), Avalon (https://tradworker.org/) and the
      European Empire. Similarly, it has several spatial imaginations of its
      enemies, from the despised globalism and mondialisme, to the ‘Zionist
      Occupation Government’, to ‘the fear of a black planet’ and massing
      brown hordes encircling the enfeebled ‘Camp of the Saints’ that repre-
      sents the white West (Raspail, 2018).                  
        Much of today’s far-right happily generates anti-Semitic imagery of
      clandestine, malign Jewish influence, from triple echo brackets to
      euphemisms such as ‘money-power’, the rootless cosmopolitan, global-
      ism,‘Hollywood’,culturalMarxism,‘Sorosmoney’,theJudeo-Christian,
      the ‘life-deniers’, and many more. For sections of the far-right, the eter-
      nalwarbetweenAryanandJewcontinuesapace.Forothers,particularly
      the counter-jihad movement, the cosmic war is against Muslims and
      ‘Islam’. These anti-Semitic and anti-Muslim strands merge or diverge
      significantly among differing far-right tendencies, but both typically
      join older anti-migrant, racist strands (Bhatt, 2012). 
        Recent far-right activities have ranged from the 2017 Charlottesville
      ‘Unite the Right’ demonstrations and the murder of Heather Heyer, the
      2019Christchurchmassacre,the2017GenerationIdentity-ledattackson
      refugee boats on the Mediterranean, numerous Proud Boy attacks on
      counter-demonstrators and feminists, a proliferating range of anti-
      Muslim activities across Europe, to high profile events (the 2017
      ‘Deploraball’), conferences, international alliances, and manifold online

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        31      
                                                             
        activities.Theintellectualresurgence–indeed,vocalintellectualtriumph-
        alism–ofthefar-rightisdemonstratedinamultitudeofblogs,YouTube
        videos,andpublishingventures,includingArktosMedia(DanielFriberg
        and JohnMorgan), Countercurrents (Greg Johnson) andRadix (Richard
        Spencer).Theseactivitiesjointheworkofolderwhitesupremacistfigures
        (such as Jared Taylor, Kevin McDonald, Steve Sailer and David Duke)
        and white supremacist libertarians (for example, Herman Hoppe.) The
        ‘God-Emperor’ Trump, at least until he agreed to the 2017 airstrikes in
        Syria, magnified internationally far-right ideas and voices.
         The sheer profusion of ideas that animate the contemporary far-right
        signals an expanding discursive universe. The ideas may be incoherent,
        juvenile or deadly, but their collective form and expansive nature is of
        considerable significance. The US alt-right started to disintegrate organ-
        izationally after Trump’s election, both because of the public rage that
        followed neo-Nazi Richard Spencer’s celebration of Trump’s election at
        an alt-right rally (‘Hail Trump! Hail our people! Hail victory!’), and
        because of the Charlottesville violence. But it had already energized
        and coalesced several ideological currents. The desire for a white
        ethnostate has often been used to distinguish the alt-right from the so-
        called alt-lite. Figures in the alt-lite, itself a tantrum of vanities, often
        feigneddistressattheirassociationwiththeneo-Nazismtheyhadhappily
        cultivated until public opprobrium became a judgement on their brand
        value. Yet, the alt-lite has been extremely influential in disseminating
        neo-Nazi or white supremacist ideas. The terms ‘alt-right’ and ‘alt-lite’
        function popularly as deceits that work to sanitize neo-Nazi and racial
        fascist movements that thrive on dishonesty, deception and euphemism,
        just as the ‘ironic’ styles of much contemporary Western fascism are
        strategies of dissimulation. The vast ecology of online white supremacist
        personalities, both ‘alt-right’ and ‘alt-lite’, include Mike Cernovich,
        Christopher Cantwell, Gavin MacInnes, Paul Joseph Watson, Jack
        Posobiec, Tara McCarthy, Colin Liddell, Brittany Pettibone, Lauren
        Southern, Andrew Anglin, Lana Lokteff, Ayla Stewart, Kyle Prescott,
        FaithGoldy,JasonKessler,KyleChapman,ColtonMerwin,‘VoxDay’,
        and Mike Peinovich, among numerous others. Many more tendencies
        have been unleashed since 2016.                      
         Despite the diversity of ideas, I will argue that the ideological core to
        each major far-right tendency is provided by the theme of ‘white extinc-
        tion’, a phrase used by the US neo-Nazi Greg Johnson (2018). This
        theme crosses the European New Right, the alt-right, the alt-lite, the
        ‘manosphere’, the traditionalists, the accelerationists, the international
        counter-jihad movement, and key strands of white supremacist
        ‘apocalyptic libertarianism’ and ‘anarcho-capitalism’. The idea of white
        extinction travels across so many far-right tendencies as to be definitive
        of contemporary Western fascism. The alt-lite and alt-right are
        indeed united in a common language of the fear of white extinction.

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      32                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      Similarly, even if the coiffured political styles of many far-right activists
      do not immediately feel like those of the racial fascism of the past, there
      are striking continuities between today’s Western fascism and older
      forms of fascist, National Socialist and neo-Nazi racial thought, a
      family semblance organized around the themes of white extinction,
      white supremacy and ‘racial’ eugenics. I am not suggesting there are no
      otherorganizingprinciples–indeed,politicalmisogynyiskeyforthefar-
      right, as are other ideologies of hierarchy, ‘anti-capitalism’ or ‘anti-
      system’ and atavism. The fear of white extinction, however, is a driving
      logic, one not simply predicated on ‘biology’ but on a complex meta-
      physics of ‘cultural’ and ‘civilizational’ decline and displacement.
        One form that the theme of white extinction takes is the ubiquitous
      ideaof‘white genocide’,thelatterimaginedonthefar-rightinnumerous
      ways. It is rendered in ‘biological’ and ‘genetic’ terms, typically as the
      decline of white populations or their replacement through genetic
      ‘mixing’ – as Brenton Tarrant, the Christchurch killer, put it, ‘It’s the
      birthrates. It’s the birthrates. It’s the birthrates’ (Tarrant, 2019). But
      ‘white genocide’ is also imagined in civilizational terms through which
      ‘culture’ with ‘biology’ are merged in sophisticated ways. The theme of
      the displacement of whites by non-white migrants has a long pedigree,
      includinginNationalSocialismandNorthAmericanwhitesupremacism
      (Gu¨nther, 1927; Stoddard, 1921). It has been regenerated more recently
      as ‘The Great Replacement’ by the French gay writer Renaud Camus
      (2011), and articulated by the Charlottesville neo-Nazis (‘You will not
      replace us!’). It is not an accident that Tarrant’s ‘manifesto’ was titled
      ‘The Great Replacement’. When Steve Bannon made repeatedreferences
      totheFrenchwriterJeanRaspail’snovel,TheCampoftheSaints(2018),
      he was seeking to invoke this precise fear of a beleaguered white popu-
      lation besieged by a (in Raspail’s imagining, Satanic) multitude that
      aimedtoengulf,displace,destroyit(Grady,2018).Infar-rightdiscourse,
      the ‘answer’ to alleged white extinction is often the imperative of exit, to
      escape elsewhere, whether this be to a ‘white ethnostate’ in the US, an
      islandinthePacific,ortowhitesovereignautonomysomewhereininter-
      national waters (Haider, 2017). In these examples, we hear the echo of
      ‘the 14 words’ of Aryan supremacist David Lane of the violent terrorist
      organization,TheOrder:‘Wemustsecuretheexistenceofourpeopleand
      a future for white children’ (Michael, 2009).          
        If Lane’s words were previously used to distinguish neo-Nazism from
      other right-wing political tendencies, they are now common in the polit-
      ical mainstream. Yet, if shared racism and fears of an imagined ‘white
      extinction’ make distinctions between many ‘traditional’, ‘populist’ and
      ‘far’ right tendencies difficult to discern, the far-right is clear about what
      distinguishes it from traditional (Burkean) or modern (post-Buckley)
      conservatism (Gottfried, 2015). The traditional right is seen as a ‘false’
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        33      
                                                             
        right beholden to the state, the interests of a governing managerial elite
        (Francis, 2016) or, more mysteriously, an imagined entity euphemized as
        ‘money-power’. In contrast, the ‘organic’, ‘deep’ or ‘real’ right (Friberg,
        2015: 16) is said to be concerned with the deep structure of a society, its
        ‘blood’ and ‘ancestry’, and the threats that these face from ‘dysgenic’
        tendencies (Andersen, 2018: 35).                     
         As with much of the far-right globally, attention to the nature of the
        society and its ‘deep’ culture, an ideological focus on the ‘nation’ and
        civil society rather than the ‘state’, is archetypal. The republican state is
        seen as a foreign imposition upon an ancestral, organic nation. The
        obsession with ancestry does not necessarily imply an antediluvian
        imagination. It is worth remembering that a key author of the first
        Fascist Manifesto, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, was also an author of
        the Futurist Manifesto (Marinetti, 2009). Futurism and fascism have a
        significant historical relation that continues in far-right ‘accelerationist’
        strands, including the aristocratic fascism of Curtis Yarvin (Mencius
        Moldbug) and Nick Land who, while claiming to be distant from
        ‘white nationalism’, leave little space between it and their own, glaring
        racial anxieties (Land, n.d.; Moldbug, 2008).        
         Thedominantstrandsofcontemporaryfascismarestronglyinfluenced
        by a series of fundamental philosophical questions whose shape is given
        bytheintellectualresourcesuponwhichcontemporaryfascismdraws.As
        hasbeennotedoften(Ferraresi,1987;Griffin,2000;Bar-On,2007),these
        resources are frequently writings from inter-war ‘revolutionary conser-
        vative’ authors in Germany, Britain, France, Italy and elsewhere, but
        also include key figures from National Socialism and Italian fascism. If
        we consider the influences on the European New Right, with some of
        these figures also important for the US alt-right, we find the philosophy
        of pessimism (Julius Evola, Oswald Spengler) and authentic being
        (Martin Heidegger, Ludwig Klages, Ernst Ju¨ nger), the rejection of liber-
        alism (Carl Schmitt, Dominique Venner and numerous others), natural
        order, hierarchy and race (Hans Gu¨nther, Vilfredo Pareto, Anthony
        Ludovici), racial science and philosophical anthropology (Hans Blu¨ her,
        Cesare Lombroso, Arnold Gehlen, among numerous others), the racial
        soul (Ludwig Ferdinand Clauss, Gustave Le Bon), and occultism (Rene´
        Gue´non, Julius Evola, Savitri Devi). The philosophy of the Italian racial
        fascist Julius Evola is ubiquitous and informs a very wide range of far-
        right currents (the EuropeanNew Right), groups (IdentityEvropa in the
        US),movements(Generation IdentityinEurope),parties(GoldenDawn
        in Greece) and traditionalist projects (Sedgewick, 2004). A key aim of
        far-right intellectual endeavours is to redeem from an earlier period and
        promote today exhaustive critiques of liberal modernity, and cultivate
        alternativecosmogoniesinwhichracismandtheviolent‘struggle’against
        ‘white extinction’ become necessary conclusions.     
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      Nietzsche’s Children                                   
                                                             
      If there is a key distinction between fascism and most other modern
      politicalideologies,itrelatestoequality,aconceptfascismwhollyrejects.
      Looking at how equality is disavowed theoretically provides us with a
      starting point from which to explore the far-right’s metaphysical uni-
      verse. Nietzsche’s hyperbolic raging against equality is important here
      because it contains elements that travel largely unchanged into today’s
      fascism. Nietzsche bound the idea of equality to ‘a total degeneration of
      humanity’, a brutal levelling into a herd of ‘stunted little animals’
      (Nietzsche, [1886] 2002: 92, 102). If, for Nietzsche, equality meant a
      flattened, degenerate modern life, then the task was not simply to
      create a new philosophy but to gather ‘the force that compels the will
      of millennia into new channels’ ([1886] 2002: 91).     
        In liberal philosophy, equality refers to an attribute such that individ-
      ualsaretreatedequallywithrespecttothatattribute.Thisalsoimpliesan
      autogenous relation between equality, fairness and justice (Dworkin,
      1981). Within deontological liberal political traditions, equality can
      also refer to an apparently universal moral and ethical purpose or
      capacity for rationality or morality (Kant, 2012). However, in no
      mainstream liberal tradition does equality imply sameness of identity,
      since equality would have no purpose if all individuals were identical.
      The idea of equality is also meaningful because it is based on philo-
      sophical abstractions about what it means to be human: it contains pre-
      sumptions about abstract universalism and humanism, just as ‘the
      human’ is a necessary abstraction that precedes the idea of equality.
      This also means that the idea of abstraction itself precedes any abstract
      concept, such as the universal human, a point that is significant for the
      kind of epistemology that some European New Right fascists deem
      important.                                             
        Informed by Nietzsche, and by the metabolism of the latter by Julius
      Evola, many contemporary far-right philosophical tendencies reject
      equality and abstract universal humanism (De Benoist, 2011). In
      Evola’s aristocratic fascism, equality only exists between people who
      exist at the same ‘degree’, their rights and freedoms not being the
      same as those at lower ‘degrees’ (Evola, 2002: 137). When conjoined
      with democracy or socialism, equality is claimed to ‘level’ humanity,
      consigning it to a mediocre, grey world of ‘sameness’ (Evola, 2002; De
      Benoist, 2011). A loathing of ‘mediocrity’ travels from Nietzsche into
      virtually every contemporary far-right current, from aristocratic fascism
      and neo-Nazism to accelerationism and libertarianism, its ubiquity sug-
      gestingthatthescreamagainstmediocrityisanervouswailaboutit.This
      point is not a superficial barb: the fear of the mediocre is a narcissistic
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        35      
                                                             
        disavowal of one’s recognition of one’s ordinary, common humanness.
        Instead, for Evola:                                  
                                                             
         The person is an individual who is differentiated through his qua-
         lities, endowed with his own face, his proper nature, and a series of
         attributes that make him who he is and distinguish him from all
         others – in other words, attributes that make him fundamentally
         unequal. (Evola, 2002: 135, emphasis in original)   
        In his fascism, and carried into the work of the European New Right’s
        most prolific ideologue, Alain de Benoist, perhaps the mortal sin of
        equality is replaceability, that any one person can be replaced by or
        exchanged with any other, since liberalism is claimed to have expunged
        thatwhichmakeseachindividualunique.Thereisindeedavolubleterror
        about sameness within much fascist writing, the fear of being a ‘mean-
        ingless duplicate’ (Evola, 2002: 134), extinguished, extinct. The fear of
        replaceability represents a severely anxious individualism that remains in
        tension with the collectivist dreams of fascism (since fascism also wants
        to create the ‘herd’, but of a different kind). This fear culminates in the
        terrorof‘TheGreatReplacement’, revealingthattheproteanterrorisof
        being replaced by those deemed non-white.            
         Severalfascist ideologues, followingNietzsche, reject abstractionitself
        asaconceptualnominalismthatillegitimately‘proceedsfromtheparticu-
        lartothegeneral’(Sunic,2011:151;Griffin,2000).TheNietzscheanargu-
        ment is that knowledge about an object cannot be generalized; it only
        exists in its specific nature. For Nietzsche, this is because there is not a
        definite ‘thing’ that we can know, only its effects (relations of power) on
        other ‘things’ (Nietzsche, [1901] 1968: 302, 314, 317). There is here an
        unqualified rejection of the extension of a descriptive concept from one
        entity to another, a repudiation of abstraction in principle. This philo-
        sophicalmoveisimportantinseveralepistemologicalcurrentsofcontem-
        poraryfascism.Infascistthinking,the‘universalhuman’isanillegitimate
        power game of the kind Nietzsche or Carl Schmitt had identified
        (Andersen, 2018: 86). The concept of a common humanity exemplifies a
        willtopower,whereasthereexistonlyspecificentities.Fromthisposition,
        a common humanity, indeed any universalism, can be fully jettisoned.
         The fascist rejection of abstractions and the stress on the distinctive-
        ness of groups is not an invitation to relativism. Dominique Venner, a
        key writer within the European New Right who committed suicide in
        2017 at Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris, in protest at gay marriage, wrote:
         This universalist belief is also dangerous for those of us in Europe.
         It stunts our ability to comprehend that other men do not feel,
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
        think, or live the same way we do. It is dangerous because it acts
        destructively upon our own identity. After having colonised other
        peoples in the name of universalism, Europeans are now in the
        process of being colonised in the name of the very same principle
        against which they do not know how to defend themselves: if all
        men are brothers, nothing can stop the arrival of others on our
        doorstep. (Venner, 2015: 3)                          
                                                             
      This last idea – that universal humanism means hordes at European
      immigrationgates–isrepeatedofteninfar-rightdiscourseandillustrates
      howaNietzschean argumentaboutepistemologytranslates into demotic
      far-right politics.                                    
        The fascist disavowal of universal abstractions includes ‘the individ-
      ual’. As with earlier occultist writers like Rene´ Gue´non (2001), individu-
      alismisseenasacorruptionofnaturethatarosefromthereviledFrench
      Revolution and Declaration of the Rights of Man, and the American
      Declaration of Independence: the individual with all its rights and free-
      doms is a degradation of the course of nature (Evola, 2001: 135). Here,
      fascist philosophy faces a difficulty, the resolution of which is of great
      significance for its ideological racism. How can fascism reconcile the
      ferocious attachment to individual distinctiveness – the ‘own face’ and
      ‘proper nature’ of Evola’s person that makes one unique and unequal –
      with the vociferous rejection of the individual? Another version of the
      same difficulty is that if there is no legitimate universal concept, and yet
      we are all unique, then what concept can be used to characterize that
      which makes us unique, without making that concept universal?
      Occult Nature                                          
      Fascism relies on ideologies of naturalism to provide its resolution to
      these difficulties it has generated. Rootedness is a powerful naturalist
      metaphor for the far-right. Indeed, ‘enrootment’ is the ‘motor of all his-
      torical dynamism’ (Faye, 2011: 131). Fascism’s human-plant analogy
      invokes the tree, the sapling and the seed, as well as the land and fertile
      soil that nourishes the plant and in which the plant is firmly entrenched.
      There is no individual outside of its enrootedness in a particular society,
      culture, nation and civilization. ‘Merely being a ‘‘man’’ is a minus com-
      pared to being a man belonging to a given nation and society’, as Evola
      putit(2002:139).Ifenrootednesscreateshumandistinctivenesssuchthat
      there must be permanent barbed wire boundaries between differing
      people, then significant also is a conception of ‘spiritual morphology’
      that distinguishes cultures and civilizations. Venner again:
        Higher civilisations are not simply regions of the planet, they are
        different planets entirely...[Civilisations] all have roots that reach
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        37      
                                                             
         back into time immemorial. These roots often dig deep into the
         depths of pre-history itself. They rest upon specific traditions that
         arepassed downthroughthe agesin ever-changingforms. ...These
         all reflect a spiritual morphology, transmitted as much through atav-
         ism as through experience. These features make us who we are,
         unlike any other. They constitute our perennial tradition, our
         unique way of being men and women in the face of life, death,
         love,history,andfate.Withoutthemwearefatedtobecomenothing;
         to disappear into chaos, and into the chaos of a world dominated by
         others. (Venner, 2015: 2, emphases added)           
                                                             
        ThisSpenglerianvisionoforganiccivilization(Spengler,[1918]1991:72–
        3) captures well the terror of ‘white extinction’. The linking of culture to
        its death is distinctive to fascism, since fascism is almost definitionally
        incapable of conceiving culture without imagining its extinction: culture
        or ‘race’ are meaningless outside of the threats to them (Krebs, 2012;
        Faye, 2016). We also have above the essential features of the metaphys-
        ical racism of the European New Right and much of the American alt-
        right. The metaphysics owes to the overfamiliar idea of philosophia per-
        ennis (eternal wisdom), similar to the Hindu sanatana dharma, an idea
        that travels from Schopenhauer into Gue´non and Evola, and into the
        contemporary far-right. Ancestral knowledge shapes the spiritual form
        which creates the culture. It is upon ideas like this that the European
        New Right’s valorizations of pagan culture depend (De Benoist, 2004).
        The swirling language is of a hoary, viscous culture ‘as old as the world’
        that imprints on the soul, a culture based on ‘an archaic instinct that
        survives ideologies because it possesses the longest memory’ (Krebs,
        2012: 26–7). Yet it rests on thin, inchoate generalities. What exactly is
        enrootedness other than an occult intuition that it exists? How can trad-
        ition be both specific and ever-changing? What attributes differentiate
        cultures such that they are ‘from different planets entirely’?
         This imprecision about a civilization or culture to which one is so
        strongly committed is there partly for strategic reasons (declaring
        Nazi-like white supremacy invokes other memories). But it also arises
        from certain fascist understandings of what culture is, and what counts
        for knowledge about culture. Since post-Enlightenment conceptual
        knowledge is anathema, fascist knowledge cannot use its disagreeable
        methods. In the far-right philosophy that is of interest here, knowledge
        is not discovered – it is remembered, it is intuited (Ferraresi, 1987;
        Gue´non, 2001: 41). The philosophia perennis will manifest in the
        memory or the ‘intellectual intuition’ of the adept (Evola, 1992: 13).
        Hence, the European New Right speaks of culture as based on
        ‘long memories’ (Andersen, 2018: 93–4). Further, despite denials that
        sound more insincere with each utterance, the only desirable culture is
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      38                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      (firmly entrenched in) white European supremacy, a ‘greatness’ that is
      ‘known’. Similarly, the European New Right or Generation Identity’s
      ‘ethnopluralism’ is a manicured euphemism for violent racial apartheid
      founded on white European supremacy (Willinger, 2013; Generation
      Identity, 2013). Generation Identity no more cares about African
      people and the future of the African continent than it regrets their col-
      onization(Willinger,2013:76),justastheallegedlymoreliberalAlainde
      Benoisthas noauthentic concern forthehumanitythatexistsoutsidehis
      ‘Indo-European’, pagan obsessions (De Benoist, 2004, 2016). Thus, the
      claim of European New Right writers’ that they oppose European colo-
      nialism is a strategic deception. Ideologues gush banalities like ‘the
      wealth of the world derives from its diversity and heterogeneity’
      (Krebs, 2012: 26–7) precisely because ‘races’ have to be separated to
      avoid ‘ethnic thanatos’ and ‘mongrelized’ people (2012: 20, 23). Yet
      many contemporary European fascists continue to deploy the falsehood
      thattheirapproachisforthegoodofthehumanitythatliberalmodernity
      has otherwise impoverished (Willinger, 2013: 71).      
        Incontemporaryfascism’sdystopicimagination,primordialecological
      unity has been mutilated by modern life. Modernity aims to destroy
      human nature and its relation to nature, just as ‘man’s’ spiritual life
      has been usurped by meaningless materialism and the abandonment of
      anourishing‘higher’cultureandspiritualpurpose.Inparallel,American
      mass culture and non-Western immigration are displacing authentic cul-
      tures (Krebs, 2012). By generating abstractions such as the individual,
      equality and democracy, modernity has ‘struck man’ from its embedded
      roots (De Benoist, 2011), turned ‘his’ natural life into a spiritless,
      unheroic, degenerate existence driven by the coveting of objects in mind-
      less consumption, the blue pill of illusory American consumerism
      (Andersen, 2018: 6–8). Human nature is now little more than
      Nietzsche’s ‘last man’ (1896: 11–13), the living dead of the Zombie
      Apocalypse.                                            
        The fascist conception, not unlike that of Marx or Rousseau, is of the
      estrangement of ‘man’ from (its) nature. The primordial organic unity to
      ‘man’ – perhaps of the kind that Marx imagined – has been destroyed in
      the interests of capitalism, ‘money-power’, the managerial state, a
      fraudulent democracy. In some European New Right and Third
      Positionist tendencies, Marx is seen as having identified much of the
      problem (estrangement, alienation, capitalism, commodity fetishism).
      But Marx did not go far enough in identifying the ‘higher spiritual pur-
      pose’ from which capitalism alienates ‘man’ (Andersen, 2018: 120), as
      well as what would remedy this brutal estrangement: rooted culture,
      nation, civilization and ‘race’.                       
        Rootedness is also linked to embodiment in contemporary fascism. In
      rejecting post-Enlightenment universal knowledge in favour of intuited
      knowledge about the particular, the body becomes an honoured site as

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        39      
                                                             
        the most particular of things one can ever ‘know’ (an idea originating
        from Schopenhauer, [1844] 1969: 100). For the far-right, the body is the
        most immediate manifestation and ‘truth’ of ‘race’. As importantly, fas-
        cism intrinsically privileges the body over logos, and the particularity of
        embodiment over human generalities. The separation of consciousness
        from the body is a disagreeable Christian idea. Furthermore, the body is
        integrally associated with one’s place in a group, tribe, nation and race,
        such that biopolitics has to be a conscious imperative against racial
        degeneration (Faye, 2011: 84). The Nazi ‘race scientist’, Hans Gu¨ nther,
        who has re-emerged in far-right thinking today (see Andersen, 2018: 45),
        describedthesignificanceofthelinkbetweennature,body,soulandrace,
        while reminding us of the Aryanism that underlies this link:
         Quite remote from [Indo-Europeans] lies the idea that the body,
         addicted to this world, is a dirty prison for a soul striving out of
         ittowardsanotherworld....Thehonouringofthebodyasavisible
         expression of membership of a selected genus or race is character-
         istic of the Indo-Europeans. (Gu¨nther, 1967: 25–6) 
                                                             
        Presentingatheoryofracialdegenerationthatexistsvirtuallyunchanged
        in many far-right writings today (Krebs, 2012; Tarrant, 2019), Gu¨ nther,
        in advocating eugenics, argued that industrialization, declining Nordic
        birthrates, the ‘admixture of blood’, ‘the spirit of humanity’, and a ‘mis-
        taken love of mankind’ was causing population degeneration in Europe
        and the United States, and helping those ‘with inferior hereditary quali-
        ties’ (Gu¨ nther, 1927: 185). Gu¨nther is deceptively presented by fascists
        today as if his concept of humanitas meant something beneficial
        (Andersen, 2018: 45). Yet, his publication, Humanitas, was widely dis-
        seminated by the Nazis, including to each member of the Hitler Youth
        (Esposito, 2012: 58). Gu¨ nther’s humanitas is a purely racial idea that
        presupposes ‘the centuries long breeding of an aristocratic type of man’
        (Gu¨nther, 1967: 49). It refers to a dignity, morality and duty specific to
        Indo-Europeans (Aryans), but it could not be for everyone, since groups
        are incommensurable in their essential nature. Here, we see names and
        ideas from the past emerge in today’s fascism as circumlocutions that
        seek to disguise the quest for a racial social and political order governed
        by an ancestral, racial elite – a ‘whitopia’ (Johnson, 2018: 98).
        Fascism’s ‘Bioculture’                               
        If Gu¨nther’s work was driven by National Socialist ‘race science’,
        another powerful series of naturalist currents emerged during the 1920s
        and 1930s that firmly rejected Darwinism, since the latter ‘relegated’
        humans among other animals and forms of life. Against Darwinism,
        alternative metaphysical understandings of nature were generated.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      40                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      Many of these currents used ideas of vitalism derived from Nietzsche
      (and Schopenhauer), with vitalism referring to a relentless, often direc-
      tionless, drive, energy, or ‘will’ – the force of life, nature’s creativity and
      power. This vitalism was different from Darwinian evolutionary biology
      against which it was often marshalled. These naturalist-vitalist currents
      are alive in today’s fascism and enable a shape-shifting, malleable intel-
      lectualprojectthatcandrawpromiscuouslyongenetics,biology,anthro-
      pology or occultism and move epistemic ground when required.
        Characterized by contemporary fascists as ‘biocentrism’, the work of
      the philosopher, writer and graphologist Ludwig Klages, someone both
      honoured and maligned in Nazi Germany, is important here. Klages’
      metaphysical vitalism travels across the contemporary European New
      Right, the alt-right, explicit neo-Nazis and various identitarian move-
      ments (see Pryce, 2001; Southgate, 2010; Hanson, 2015; Andersen,
      n.d.). His vitalist critique of logocentrism also influenced other writers,
      includingWalterBenjamin,theFrankfurtSchoolandHabermas(Wolin,
      2008; Stauth and Turner, 1992). For Klages, as for Derrida after him,
      logocentrism characterizes the mode of Western philosophy, beginning
      with Socrates, that was the target of his critique (Klages, n.d.). Klages’
      work is a rejection of conceptual, representational, ‘referential’ thought.
      For him, as for later postmodernists, the image is the real, appearance is
      actuality. Similarly, ‘life is not ‘‘observed,’’ but it is felt with all of our
      darkest powers’. Concept rather than image, however, now dominates
      the world, with Western philosophy ‘conditioned’ to work for capitalism
      (Klages, 2013: 57).                                    
        The problems Klages claimed to identify were symptomatic of a far
      larger issue: ‘a power from outside our cosmos has broken into the
      sphere of life’ (Klages, 2013: 42). For Klages, life is assaulted by that
      which denies life, whether it is Socratic reason, scientific knowledge, the
      categorical imperative, Christianity, the mind-body and subject-object
      distinction, quantification, or capitalism. Conversely, the ‘phenomenal
      manifestation of life’ (Klages, 2013: 96) is the living cell, the plant, the
      fallofastone,theformationofclouds,‘thefirmamentofthefixedstars’,
      all of which ‘richly proclaim the presence of this vital unity’ that Klages
      calledSeele(soul,butheremeaninglife),aunitywhichwasunderassault
      by what he called Geist (Spirit), the adversary of life (Klages, 2013: 13).
      Klages’ flourishes might provoke us to imagine Master Yoda, but some
      elements of his thinking are important for contemporary fascist thought:
      pagan vitalism, the primacy of image, apprehension and feeling over
      universal conceptual thinking, and a metaphysical war between ‘life’
      and the life-obliterating which, in contemporary neo-Nazism, metonym-
      ically stands in for the eternal battle between Aryan and Jew.
        Klages’ ideas about the lifeworld being colonized by the rational,
      technological and bureaucratic have much resonance in leftist thought.
      But, for contemporary fascists, the ‘colonization’ of authentic life by

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        41      
                                                             
        ‘money-power’, ‘the system’, everything represented bythe blue pill, rep-
        resents the pollution of the entire social formation – markets, states,
        politics, civil society, family. If the ‘system’ or ‘deep state’ is an alien
        corruption that thwarts authentic existence, then any disruption of the
        system is a virtue, whether it is cryptocurrency or Steve Bannon calling
        for‘deconstructingtheadministrativestate’(Fisher,2017)oroverwhelm-
        ing the media by ‘flooding the zone with shit’ (Remnick, 2018).
        Disruption is a noble goal, since the metaphysics informing it is of a
        simple duality between a life-destroying system and a heroic resistance.
        One is not fighting on behalf of universal humanity (as liberals and left-
        ists might be doing), but on the side of nature’s immense power and
        vitality – cosmic life itself.                       
                                                             
        The Field of Fascist Racism                          
        If vitalist thought presents one field for understanding contemporary
        fascism, the latter also mobilizes other intellectual currents to generate
        aphenomenologicalanthropologyofracialexistence.Considerthisfrom
        ‘reluctant hater’ and neo-Nazi Greg Johnson of Countercurrents,
        one of the key figures of the US alt-right before its organizational
        disintegration:                                      
                                                             
         A year ago, I would have placed Polynesians on the list of peoples
         I had nothing against. But I had no direct contact with them. Then
         several families from Samoa or Tonga moved in a few buildings
         down. I thought they were aesthetically unappealing: large,
         brown, Australoid-Mongoloid hybrids who easily run to flab. But
         theyseemedpleasantenoughatfirst.ThenIstartednoticingcertain
         annoying differences. For instance, although their personal hygiene
         doesnot seemproblematic –though Ihave notgotten closeenough
         to confirm that – in other respects, they are unspeakably filthy
         people. For instance, they are fond of noisily socializing and
         eating together outdoors. This is bad enough, but days later, the
         ground is still littered not only with trash and toys, but also with
         discarded food. (Johnson, 2016: 3)                  
                                                             
        This racism is based on a phenomenology of immediate, spontaneous
        hostility that naturally bursts forth upon contact. It mobilizes a natural-
        ist idea about the authenticity of the feeling of hatred that arises from
        sensory perception. The instinctive loathing of what one visually appre-
        hends requires no further (rational, evidential, conceptual) justification.
        Indeed, anything other than this kind of spontaneous aversion is
        considered ‘ethno-masochism’ or ‘metapolitical suicide’ (Krebs, 2012;
        Faye, 2016: 75).                                     
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      42                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
        This naturalist racism aims to legitimize the deepest forms of animos-
      ity as a normal political form. It has important intellectual elements,
      including the authority of the immediate feelings that arise from the
      apprehension of difference, as well as the illegitimacy of conceptual
      thinking that might create an affiliation to another human person.
      Further elements are given by something that is neither strictly ‘physical
      anthropology’ nor in the tradition of ‘philosophical anthropology’ but
      uses both. Here, perceiving social and cultural (rather than ‘biological’)
      ‘races’isseenasnatural,inevitable,inherent.Thisindwellingqualitythat
      simultaneously recognizes and loathes has a metaphysical status in some
      forms of fascist thinking: anthropos is a metaphysical entity that recog-
      nizes ‘race’ as central to its existence. In Alain de Benoist’s dissimulating
      prose, the recognition of perceived ‘races’ transmutes into ‘the right to
      difference’ and heterophilia.                          
        Ultimately, theclaimthatthesimple observation ofthe existenceof
        races stems from ‘racism’ is untenable. It implies, bizarrely, that
        perception of races can only lead to negative evaluations. ...One
        cannot eliminate a shared perception, even in the name of ‘science,’
        by branding it as an ‘illusion.’ (De Benoist, 1999: 42)
                                                             
      Here,DeBenoistslithersfromsomethinglike‘ahumaninstincttonotice
      difference’toajustificationforracism,whileclaimingtodotheopposite.
      This turning of prejudice into a primal, ‘biocultural’ instinct needs
      further excavation, since it links directly to the far-right’s abhorrence
      regarding ‘racial pollution’ and ‘mixing’.             
        The contribution of philosophical anthropology, an intellectual cur-
      rent arising from the 1920s in Germany and elsewhere, to contemporary
      fascism is of relevance. Like the vitalist currents described earlier, philo-
      sophicalanthropologyassertedthedistinctivenessof‘man’againstdevel-
      opmentsin post-Darwinian biology. Asdeveloped byMaxScheler, what
      differentiated humans from nature and from other animals was ‘spirit’
      (Levy, 1985; Rehberg, 2009). Arnold Gehlen was a committed National
      Socialist, but his contribution to philosophical anthropology presents a
      complex legacy for fascists who deploy his work. Gehlen used an idea
      from Nietzsche of the human as a ‘still not determined’ animal
      (Nietzsche, [1886] 2002: 56), and Max Scheler’s idea of the human as a
      ‘world-open’ creature that was not tied to a particular environment
      (Gehlen, 1988: 15). The human is a ‘deficient being’, since it is unspecial-
      ized, but this ‘deficiency’ also means an ‘undetermined’, ‘unfinished’
      nature – a general, plastic, trainable being (Gehlen, 1988: 24).
        While the appeal of a mouldable human for fascism is obvious (see
      Faye, 2016: 193), of significance is another critical idea from Gehlen:
      humans create institutions that generate the continuity and stability
      needed for biological survival. For some contemporary fascists, culture
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        43      
                                                             
        is the key institution that a biologically ‘naked’ creature is compelled to
        create(Andersen,2018:93;DeBenoist,1999).Here,aninextricableasso-
        ciation between biology and culture is derived from philosophical
        anthropology: culture’s alleged proximity to biological survival leads to
        the idea of culture as a ‘second nature’. It is through this merging of
        culture with biology that European New Right thinkers derive ideas of
        cultureinwhichracialapprehensionissimplynaturalandinstinct-driven
        (Andersen, 2018: 93).                                
         Yet, several sharp difficulties emerge for contemporary fascist think-
        ing. If the human is general, adaptable, and has the capacity for a vast
        array of actions, why should multiculturalism or a general empathy for
        allofhumanitynotbethoseactions?Ifculturesevolve,whycantheynot
        evolveimpurely?Byanalogy,thesamefatalcontradictionemergesinfar-
        right accelerationists’ combination of biological, white supremacist
        racism with a concupiscent fetish for the limitless possibilities of
        human genetic modification.                          
         Thevarietyofvitalistandnaturalistideasaboveinformsaspanofracial
        thinking among contemporary fascists that ranges from individual,
        ‘instinctive’ hatred to the ‘racial’ souls of vast civilizations, and from alleg-
        edly ‘biological-genetic’ to occult understandings of ‘race’, culture and civ-
        ilization. They provide intellectual resources that assist fascism in
        cultivating a variety of positions, as toxic as they are. If US alt-right
        racial thinking tends towards accepting the claims of pseudoscientific
        ‘human biodiversity’ or ‘race realism’ (Johnson, 2018: 66), the European
        New Right’s racism glides from ‘human biodiversity’ to ‘bioculture’ to
        metaphysical forms of racism. Far-right ideologue Guillaume Faye
        speaks of ‘biocultural identity as the base of everything’, with culture rest-
        ing on a ‘bio-anthropological substrata, its germen’ (2011: 35, 106, 146).
        This 18th- and 19th-century use of germen (‘seed’) means little other than
        an imagined metaphysical essence. But for Faye, ‘race’ is also genetic,
        manifestingas‘innatephysiologicalandbiologicaldifferences’and‘racially’
        distinctgeneticpopulations(2011:226).Yethecanrejecttheideaofa‘pure
        race’ and state that Europeans are genetically hybrid (2011: 225).
         Similarly, European New Right thinkers promote the idea of a
        ‘rooted’ white European superiority that rejects cultural or ‘racial’
        mixing, while also maintaining that all cultures change. They support a
        ‘bioracism’thatcannotcommittotheactualfindingsofancestralhuman
        genetics or contemporary genetic biology, but nevertheless maintains a
        ‘bio-anthropological’understandingoffixed‘races’(Krebs,2012:82)and
        can shift ground to genetic or cultural racism when it suits. Some neo-
        Nazis also make the argument that if ‘race’ is only socially constructed,
        that makes it a social fact real enough for white nationalism (Johnson,
        2018: 67). Yet, there is also the idea of cultures and civilizations as living
        entities that possess a ‘soul’, immaterial in form, but vital to meaningful
        human existence (Spengler, [1918] 1991), and so must be protected

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      44                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      (Andersen, 2018: 11). Ideas of ‘bioculture’ also travel into the shrieking
      ‘declaration of war against the 68ers’ by Generation Identity in which it
      claims: ‘the wish for boundaries and the pursuit of identity are primal
      drives that will always be with us’ (Willinger, 2013: 83, emphasis added).
      Itisnecessarytograspthefulldemoticsignificanceoffascistunderstand-
      ingsof‘bioculture’:fascistoppositiontonon-Westernimmigrationisnot
      based on economic or superficially cultural arguments, but on eugenic
      reasoning and a revulsion towards ‘miscegenation’ (Krebs, 2012; Faye,
      2016; Johnson, 2018). The key vitalist power, the genius of daring or
      thumos manifests most significantly in ‘the white race’ (Andersen, 2018:
      172–3), the latter in considerable danger because of ‘dysgenic’ trends.
        If eugenic reasoning characterizes today’s Western far-right (and
      indeed, much populist right thinking), it existed in virtually the same
      form during the 1920s and 1930s. In the work of Hans Gu¨nther and
      white supremacist author Lothrop Stoddard, writing in Europe and
      NorthAmericarespectivelyduringthe1920s,weseethesamecelebration
      of white vitalism, and the same anxieties about elite white extinction: the
      ‘admixture of alien blood can modify or even destroy the very soul of a
      people’ (Stoddard, 1921: 254). When we encounter the supposedly
      human-loving ‘ethnopluralism’ of the European New Right or the sep-
      arate homelands advocated by the US alt-right, it is worth remembering
      the origin of these ideas:                             
        Immigration restriction is a species of segregation on a large scale,
        by which inferior stocks can be prevented from both diluting and
        supplanting good stocks. Just as we isolate bacterial invasions, and
        starve out the bacteria by limiting the area and amount of their
        food-supply, so we can compel an inferior race to remain in its
        native habitat, where its own multiplication in a limited area will, as
        withallorganisms,eventuallylimititsnumbersandthereforeitsinflu-
        ence. (Stoddard, 1921: 260, emphasis added)          
      Stoddardfeared‘therisingtideofcolor’againstthewhiteworld,muchlike
      Trump, Bannon, the alt-right and alt-lite do today. Tracts such as his
      conceive of whites as an international collective, such that an injury to
      oneshouldbefeltbywhiteseverywhere.Thepowerofthisideawasrecog-
      nized fully by Brenton Tarrant, the Christchurch killer, as it is by North
      Americanmembersofthewhiteummafromthealt-right,thealt-liteorthe
      counter-jihadmovementwhoareexceptionallyobsessedbythecatastrophe
      befalling ‘white Europe’ as a result of migration, birthrates or Muslims.
                                                             
      Fascism’s Nostalgia for the Future                     
      Fascism is often seen as an ideology of civilizational decline and nation-
      alist rebirth (‘palingenetic ultranationalism’; Griffin, 1993). The idea of
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        45      
                                                             
        ‘rebirth’ provides ‘hope’ for the fascist imagination. But suppose ‘hope’
        and victorious rebirth have been extinguished as possibilities by fascist
        metaphysicsitself?Iwanttofocusonadifferentsetofmetaphysicalideas
        that are about civilizational and racial decline but are also pessimistic
        about ‘destiny’. Here, the path to ‘rebirth’ may not be corrigible, may
        indeed be impossible. These ideas signal the apocalyptic dimensions of
        some contemporary fascist thinking, in particular the power of cleansing
        violence of the kind that animated fascist terrorists from Timothy
        McVeigh to Anders Breivik to Brenton Tarrant.        
         For contemporary fascists, the world is a dystopia that will precede
        somethinglikeRagnaro¨ k(the‘doomofthegods’),ametaphorforglobal
        catastrophe (Andersen, 2018: 6). Ragnaro¨k is one symbol for the apoca-
        lyptic imagination that is central to fascism. Fascist thinking today is a
        seriesofdystopicvisions:the‘kalifuckingyuga’,Evola’s‘menamongthe
        ruins’, white extinction, the spiritual decay of Western civilization. Here,
        ‘money-power’ has occulted immaterial values, the personality is transi-
        ent, gratified by meaningless consumption; the strong cultures and birth-
        rates of migrants are resulting in Europeans being ‘wiped out’ (Johnson,
        2018). This fascist narrative of Western decline is an example of a recur-
        ring declinist narrative in Europe emerging from the early 19th century,
        of which Spengler’s work is a key example. The narrative of Western
        decline also suggests a linear path to catastrophe. This, however, does
        notcapturethemorecomplexmetaphysicsoftimeuponwhichfascismis
        often based.                                         
         ThefascistrejectionofEnlightenmentknowledgeisalsoarepudiation
        of linear temporality, and therefore of the optimism that accompanies
        narratives of progress. Of significance is Nietzsche’s ‘eternal recurrence’,
        itself informed by Schopenhauer’s use of Hindu and Buddhist cyclical
        time: the future becomes the past, just as the past is waiting for us. But
        eternalrecurrenceisnotnecessarilyarepetitionofthesame;timeisnota
        two-dimensional circle. Instead, each instance of recurrence represents a
        different circular path on a sphere. As with Heidegger, the origin ‘bursts
        into our future’ (De Benoist, 2004: 13). This may help us see why so
        many of today’s fascist thinkers are obsessed with medieval aristocratic
        feudalism. In a cyclical conception of time, aristocratic feudalism existed
        in the past and will do so again in the future, yet it will be informed by
        what has gone before it, including technological advancement. Hence,
        Guillaume Faye’s ‘archaeofuturism’ that seeks to ‘reconcile Evola with
        Marinetti’ (2010: 89) or Mencius Moldbug’s advocation of ‘cameralism’
        or ‘manoralism’ (2008). If the latter are past forms of anti-democratic
        governance, they now join with the narcissistic self-belief among some
        that societies are like the software and admin systems they tinker with
        every day.                                           
         In the ‘new, traditional’ society that the European New Right and
        other fascists desire, individuals will belong to their appropriate

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      46                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      gender, racial and caste ‘domains’ through which they ‘realize’ them-
      selves. The glue that would hold this social formation together and
      drive it forward consists of alliances of men, Ma¨nnerbund, whose
      values are chivalry, honour, courage, greatness – the spiritual, aristo-
      cratic and warrior values of which Julius Evola was fond. Jack
      Donovan, a gay writer whose work has been avidly promoted by neo-
      NaziRichardSpencer,amongothers,promotessomeoftheseolderideas
      as exemplifying the tribal ‘way of men’ needed today (Donovan, 2012;
      MillerandDonovan,2012).Inthefascistimagination,Ma¨nnerbundsare
      alleged to have held societies together historically but have been emas-
      culated by feminism, liberalism, ‘money-power’. The fascist fetish for
      medieval societies, rendered as peaceful utopias of ‘fidelity and mutual
      responsibility’ (Andersen, 2018: 50), is not surprising, since the despised
      French Revolution heralded their decline. Yet, the obsession is based on
      an occultist natural law theory of organic, hierarchical, patriarchal soci-
      ety and nature’s cosmic order.                         
        It is, however, a consequence of cyclical time that all civilizations
      decline as their success leads to eventual ‘decadence’ (Andersen,
      2018: 13). Why should one take any action now in the face of this
      cosmically driven fatalism? Why should the ‘men among the ruins’ do
      anything at all? Evola, in addressing this issue, considered a small, elite
      group of men who might be able to join the ‘regal stream’ of history
      (Evola, 1995: 366). Contemporary fascists see the current period as an
      interregnum between the ‘dying liberal order’ and a new one that is to
      emerge.Forsomefascists,thereistoday‘thegreatestpossibilityofgiving
      shape to the future than anytime in the last half century’. While cyclical
      time engenders a natural pessimism, ‘the gods do intervene’: ‘We need
      ‘‘full spectrum dominance’’ and synergies; we need to control not only
      the street, but the Internet, the parliaments as well as the academy’
      (Andersen, 2018: 6, 302).                              
        In fascist metaphysics, nevertheless, whatever one does now will
      become meaningless in time; there is no happy, settled life. Of import-
      ance here is the fascist rendering of destiny. Action, especially heroic
      action, is associated with being bound to destiny. Yet this is not neces-
      sarily destiny with a purpose. This idea constitutes a significant strand
      in contemporary fascist metaphysics, and it can be understood as pro-
      moting a ‘destiny-bound life’ that cannot be tied to redemption; nor is
      it fatalistic, since it is inextricably linked to the necessity of action.
      Gu¨ nther, quoting Schopenhauer, explains that ‘A happy life is impos-
      sible, the highest to which man can attain is a heroic course of life’
      (Gu¨ nther, 1967: 19). There can be no redemption, anxiety, contrition
      or self-damnation here, since these are ‘Christian’. Instead, men ‘stand
      squarely’ and ‘stand upright’ amidst the turmoil and ruins and pay
      homage to the certainty of destiny.                    
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        47      
                                                             
         This doublet of pessimism and destiny is, I think, central to much
        contemporary fascism and arises from the metaphysical resources upon
        which it draws: the work of Evola, Ernst Ju¨nger, Hans Gu¨nther, Klages,
        Nietzsche, among others. For several strands of fascist thinking, there is
        no possible resolution to the global crisis being witnessed. The crisis will
        not be resolved by migration ending, by liberalism being voted out, by
        any number of ‘policy changes’ or ‘populist’ figures. Destiny is about
        heroic action, yet it has no guarantee other than that action. There is
        thereforealsodespairandlamentasametaphysicalangstofthekindthat
        oneneedstoturntoKierkegaardtograspfully.Inthissense,fascismisa
        response to an existentialism that it has consciously created, one which
        ultimately views individual ‘racial’ existence as tormented and purpose-
        less. If there is a scream of individuality, which therefore demands indi-
        vidualism, this is hopeless for reasons we have already seen. There is no
        future redemption, since the path to the future is not linear and is ultim-
        ately without any meaning other than the meaning one places upon des-
        tiny. One resolution is to commit to a belief to which one does not fully
        subscribe, such as traditionalism or paganism. Stepping out of existing
        socialityisanother,muchlikeJu¨ nger’sfigureoftheAnarchthatisinbut
        notofthesocialinwhichitfindsitself.Butthemostsignificantresolution
        is cleansing apocalyptic violence, a consequence of the metaphysical
        racism that underlies fascism.                       
        Conclusion                                           
                                                             
        Contemporary fascism represents political ideologies that fear ‘white
        extinction’ and celebrate ‘racial separation’ and natural (‘racial’, sex)
        inequality. Any ideology of organic inequality cannot but be animated
        by a metaphysics of violence against those who are considered unequal.
        The long-cultivated political ideology of ‘race war’ thus becomes an
        imperative. Hence, the grotesque violence of ‘Knights Justiciar’
        Breivik, Brenton Tarrant, Dylann Roof (of the 2015 killings of
        African-American churchgoers in Charleston) and Darren Osborne (of
        the 2017 van attack on worshippers at Finsbury Park mosque, north
        London), with each signalling ‘vengeance’ and a mode of violence that
        seeks to polarize populations. Fascist violence today is not typically dir-
        ected against the state or institutions but against people in civil society.
        Tarrant’s belief was that his terrorism would ignite a greater violence
        against racial minorities to reverse ‘The Great Replacement’. Yet,
        significant parts of his ‘manifesto’ suggest the impossibility of such
        an outcome, since allegedly high birthrates are a global phenomenon.
        The overwhelming theme is despair about ‘white extinction’ and the
        imperative to remove migrants from Europe by violent force, including
        the mass murder of migrant children. The racist and fascist obsession
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      48                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      withmigrantbirthrateshasalongpedigreethatprojectsafamiliarsexual
      anxiety:                                               
                                                             
        Allthroughimmigration.Thisisethnicreplacement.Thisiscultural
        replacement. This is racial replacement. This is WHITE
        GENOCIDE. (Tarrant, 2019)                            
      Tarrant’s document, like those of Dylann Roof and others, are demotic
      condensationsofthemetaphysicsexaminedabove.Theracismintoday’s
      fascism is violent, absurd and intellectually driven, willingly embracing a
      post-truth universe, yet making definite claims about infallible know-
      ledge. A 4chan meme may enfold occult, Nazi-like anti-Semitic ideas
      with anti-black hatred and ideas derived from ‘human biodiversity’.
      Yet,withinthismire,therearedistinctthematicandintellectualcurrents.
      Their deployment is not systematic but promiscuous. Contemporary fas-
      cism deploys ideas of naturalism, political misogyny, vitalism, hierarchy
      and racial order. Elements of philosophical anthropology merge with
      vitalist, naturalist currents to provide a different epistemology of ‘race’
      and racism. Though it readily mobilizes ‘racial types’, the new epistem-
      ology of ‘race’ is not strictly based on ‘type’ and ‘typology’ (Banton,
      1979). Indeed, it can even be ‘anti-type’ since it rejects abstractions.
      Primarily, its energy comes from mobilizing ideas of ‘bioculture’, ‘cul-
      tural specificity’, ‘spirit’. Its starting point is the phenomenology of
      instinctual ‘racial’ antagonism. Here, the ‘folk anthropology’ about the
      naturalapprehensionof‘racial’differenceisadeceptionthatmasksplain
      racist hatred. This ‘racial’ feeling emerges from those who are deemed to
      be the legitimate inheritors of the land.              
        Yet, if ‘land’ and ‘plant’ are key motifs in contemporary fascism, the
      inheritance of the soil does not necessarily belong to autochthons or the
      indigenous in any consistent way. Contemporary fascism, in having to
      reckon with the monumental churn of human genetic history and its
      consequencethatnoplanetarylandhasever‘belonged’toanydistinctive
      group of humans in meaningful continuity (Reich, 2018), turns to occult
      ideas of greatness, tradition and genius to make claims about territory.
      Europe is legitimately the land of white Europeans, but so is Australia,
      the United States or South Africa since white ‘genius’ – ‘genius’ being a
      racial imprint on the soul – has made those its own. Since contemporary
      fascism can shift epistemic ground rapidly, and since it is committed to
      philosophies in which dissimulation and hatred are legitimate conse-
      quences of nature’s order, it is formidable for those reasons alone.
        The political languages of contemporary fascism stand in a symbiotic
      relationship to the political environment in which they have thrived.
      Theyhavebeenasmuchproducedbycontemporaryracistandxenopho-
      bicpoliticalcultureinEuro-Americaastheyhaveinfluencedit.Thereisa
      shareduniverseofmeaningbetweenmuchmainstreampoliticaldiscourse
                                                             

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        49      
                                                             
        and contemporary white nationalism. The ‘fear of white extinction’, and
        related ideas of population eugenics, have travelled far and represent a
        wider political anxiety about ‘white displacement’ in the US, UK and
        Europe that has fuelled the right-wing phenomena referred to by that
        sanitizing word ‘populism’, a term that neatly evades attention to the
        racism and white majoritarianism that energizes it. Trump’s ‘populist’
        racism was able to articulate in a seamless way the ideological positions
        of both US neo-Nazis and the international counter-jihad movement. If
        multiculturalism is described as the destruction of Western civilization,
        or characterized as a cosmopolitan elite pastime that betrays the real
        interests of the indigenous working class, if migrants are depicted as an
        invading foe, or concern about ‘racial’ birthrates or whites as an inter-
        national collective animates political discourse, as with Trump’s rhetoric
        about ‘white genocide’ in South Africa (De Greef and Karasz, 2018), the
        political landscape has already embraced fascism.    
        ORCID iD                                             
        Chetan Bhatt https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4025-4203   
                                                             
        Acknowledgements                                     
        I would like to thank Andrew Chance, Ed Pertwee, Judy Wajcman, Steve Hubbell,
        Monika Krause, Suzanne Hall, Michael Biggs, Ian Patel and the anonymous reviewers
        for theirhelpful comments.                           
        References                                           
        Andersen, Joakim (2018) Rising from the Ruins: The Right of the 21st Century.
         London: Arktos.                                     
        Andersen, Joakim (n.d.) The characterology of Ludwig Klages. Available at:
         https://altright.com/2016/09/28/the-characterology-of-ludwig-klages/
         (accessed 1 May 2020).                              
        Anglin, Andrew (2016) A normie’s guide to the alt-right. Available at: https://
         dailystormer.su/a-normies-guide-to-the-alt-right/ (accessed 1 May 2020).
        Banton, Michael (1979) The Idea of Race. Boulder, CO: Westview.
        Bar-On, Tamir (2007) Where Have All the Fascists Gone? Aldershot: Ashgate.
        Bhatt, Chetan (2012) The new xenologies of Europe: Civil tensions and mythic
         pasts. Journal of Civil Society 8(3): 307–326.      
        Camus, Renaud (2011) Le Grand Remplacement. Paris: D. Reinhard.
        De Benoist, Alain (1999) What is racism? Telos 114: 11–48.
        De Benoist, Alain (2004) On Being a Pagan. Atlanta, GA: Ultra.
        De Benoist, Alain (2011) Beyond Human Rights, Defending Freedoms. London:
         Arktos Media.                                       
        De Benoist, Alain (2016) The Indo-Europeans: In Search of the Homeland.
         London: Arktos.                                     
        De Greef, Kimon and Karasz, Palko (2018) Trump cites false claims of wide-
         spreadattacksonwhitefarmersinSouthAfrica.NewYorkTimes,23August.
         Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/23/world/africa/trump-
         south-africa-white-farmers.html (accessed 1 May 2020). .

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      50                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      Donovan, Jack (2012) The Way of Men. Milwaukie, OR: Dissonant Hum.
      Dugin,Alexander(2014)EurasianMission:AnIntroductiontoNeo-Eurasianism.
        London: Arktos.                                      
      Dworkin, Ronald (1981) What is equality? Part 1: Equality of welfare.
        Philosophy & Public Affairs 10(3): 185–246.          
      Esposito, Roberto (2012) The Third Person. Cambridge: Polity.
      Evola, Julius (1992) The Yoga of Power: Tantra, Shakti and the Secret Way.
        Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.                     
      Evola, Julius (1995) Revolt Against the Modern World. Rochester, VT: Inner
        Traditions.                                          
      Evola, Julius (2002) Men Among the Ruins: Postwar Reflections of a Radical
        Traditionalist. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions.     
      Faye, Guillaume (2010) Archaeofuturism: European Visions of the Post-
        Catastrophic Age. London: Arktos.                    
      Faye, Guillaume (2011) Why We Fight: European Visions of the Post-
        Catastrophic Age. London: Arktos.                    
      Faye, Guillaume (2016) The Colonisation of Europe. London: Arktos.
      Ferraresi, Franco (1987) Julius Evola: Tradition, reaction, and the Radical
        Right. European Journal of Sociology 28(1): 107–151. 
      Fisher, Max (2017) Stephen K. Bannon’s CPAC comments, annotated and
        explained. New York Times, 24 February. Available at: https://www.
        nytimes.com/2017/02/24/us/politics/stephen-bannon-cpac-speech.html
        (accessed 1 May 2020).                               
      Francis, Samuel T. (2016) Leviathan and its Enemies: Mass Organization and
        ManagerialPowerinTwentieth-CenturyAmerica,Arlington,VA:Washington
        Summit.                                              
      Friberg, Daniel (2015) The Real Right Returns: A Handbook for the True
        Opposition. London: Arktos.                          
      Gardell, Mattias (2003) Gods of the Blood: The Pagan Revival and White
        Separatism. Durham: Duke University Press.           
      Gehlen, Arnold (1988) Man: His Nature and Place in the World. New York:
        Columbia University Press.                           
      Generation Identity (2013) We Are Generation Identity. London: Arktos.
      Gottfried, Paul E. (2015) Rethinking William F. Buckley’s quest for ‘respect-
        ability’.In:Gottfried,PaulE.andSpencer,RichardB.(eds)TheGreatPurge:
        The Deformation of the Conservative Movement. Arlington, VA: Washington
        Summit.                                              
      Grady, Constance (2018) Turns out Steve Bannon’s favorite novel is very, very
        racist. Vox, 10 February. Available at: https://www.vox.com/culture/2018/2/
        10/16990428/steve-bannon-favorite-novel-camp-of-saints-racist (accessed 1
        May 2020).                                           
      Griffin, Roger (1993) The Nature of Fascism. London: Routledge.
      Griffin,Roger(2000)Betweenmetapoliticsandapoliteia:TheNouvelleDroite’s
        strategy for conserving the fascist vision in the ‘interregnum’. Modern and
        Contemporary France 8(1): 35–53.                     
      Gue´non, Rene´ (2001) The Crisis of the Modern World. Hillsdale, NY: Sophia
        Perennis.                                            
      Gu¨nther, Hans F.K. (1927) The Racial Elements of European History. London:
        Methuen.                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Bhatt                                        51      
                                                             
        Gu¨nther, Hans F.K. (1967) The Religious Attitudes of the Indo-Europeans.
         London: Clair Press.                                
        Haider,Shuja(2017)Thedarknessattheendofthetunnel:Artificialintelligence
         and neoreaction. Viewpoint Magazine, 28 March. Available at: https://www.
         viewpointmag.com/2017/03/28/the-darkness-at-the-end-of-the-tunnel-artifi-
         cial-intelligence-and-neoreaction/ (accessed 1 May 2020).
        Hanson, Bradford (2015) Ludwig Klages on Judaism, Christianity and pagan-
         ism (excerpts and aphorisms). Available at: https://nationalvanguard.org/
         2015/06/ludwig-klages-on-judaism-christianity-and-paganism-excerpts-and-
         aphorisms/ (accessed 1 May 2020).                   
        Johnson, Greg (2016) Confessions of a Reluctant Hater and Other Essays (2nd
         edition). San Francisco, CA: Counter-Currents.      
        Johnson, Greg (2018) The White Nationalist Manifesto. San Francisco, CA:
         Counter-Currents.                                   
        Kant, Immanuel (2012) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.                         
        Klages, Ludwig (2013) The Biocentric Worldview: Selected Essays andPoems of
         Ludwig Klages. London: Arktos.                      
        Klages,Ludwig(n.d.)TheproblemofSocrates.Availableat:http://www.revilo-
         oliver.com/Writers/Klages/Socrates_and_Images.html (accessed 1 May
         2020).                                              
        Krebs, Pierre (2012) Fighting for the Essence: Western Ethnocide or European
         Renaissance. London: Arktos.                        
        Land,Nick(n.d.)Thedarkenlightenment.Availableat:http://www.thedarken-
         lightenment.com/the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/ (accessed 1 May
         2020).                                              
        Levy, David J. (1985) The anthropological horizon: Max Scheler, Arnold
         Gehlen and the idea of a philosophical anthropology. Journal of the
         Anthropological Society of Oxford 16(3): 169–187.   
        Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso (2009) The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism
         (1909).In:Apollonio,Umbro,FuturistManifestos.London:TatePublishing.
        McNallen, Stephen (1985) What Is Asatru? Nevada City, CA: Asatru Folk
         Assembly.                                           
        Michael, George (2009) David Lane and the fourteen words. Totalitarian
         Movements and Political Religions 10(1): 43–61.     
        Miller,NathanF.andDonovan,Jack(2012)Blood-BrotherhoodandOtherRites
         of Male Alliance. Milwaukie, OR: Dissonant Hum.     
        Moldbug, Mencius [Curtis Yarvin] (2008) An open letter to open minded pro-
         gressives. Available at: https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2008/06/
         ol9-how-to-uninstall-cathedral/ (accessed 1 May 2020).
        Nietzsche, Friedrich (1896) Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and None.
         London: Macmillan.                                  
        Nietzsche, Friedrich ([1901] 1968) The Will to Power. New York: Vintage.
        Nietzsche,Friedrich([1886]2002)BeyondGoodandEvil:PreludetoaPhilosophy
         of the Future. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Pryce,Joe(2001)OnthebiocentricmetaphysicsofLudwigKlages.Availableat:
         http://www.revilo-oliver.com/Writers/Klages/Ludwig_Klages.html (accessed
         1 May 2020).                                        

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      52                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(1)
                                                             
      Raspail, Jean (2018) The Camp of the Saints. Petoskey, MI: Social Contract
        Press.                                               
      Rehberg, Karl-Siegbert (2009) Philosophical anthropology from the end of
        World War I to the 1940s and in a current perspective. IRIS: European
        Journal of Philosophy and Public Debate (May): 131–152.
      Reich,David(2018)WhoWeAreandHowWeGotHere:AncientDNAandthe
        New Science of the Human Past. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Remnick, David (2018) Trump vs. the Times: Inside an off-the-record meeting.
        New Yorker, 30 July. Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-
        desk/trump-vs-the-times-inside-an-off-the-record-meeting (accessed 1 May
        2020).                                               
      Schopenhauer, Arthur ([1864] 1969) The World as Will and Representation,
        Volume I. New York: Dover.                           
      Sedgewick, Mark (2004) Against the Modern World: Traditionalism and the
        Secret Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.                                    
      Southgate, Troy (2010) Interview with Robert Steuckers. Available at: https://
        www.counter-currents.com/2010/09/steuckers-interview/ (accessed 1 May
        2020).                                               
      Spengler, Oswald ([1918] 1991) The Decline of the West. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.                                    
      Stauth,GeorgandTurner,BryanS.(1992)LudwigKlages(1872–1956)andthe
        origins of critical theory. Theory, Culture & Society 9(3): 45–63.
      Stoddard, Lothrop (1921) The Rising Tide of Color Against White World
        Supremacy. New York: Charles Scribner.               
      Sunic, Tomislav (2011) Against Democracy and Equality: The European New
        Right. London: Arktos.                               
      Tarrant,Brenton(2019)TheGreatReplacement.Available at:https://www.ilfo-
        glio.it/userUpload/The_Great_Replacementconvertito.pdf (accessed 1 May
        2020).                                               
      Venner, Dominique (2015) The Shock of History: Religion, Memory, Identity.
        London: Arktos.                                      
      Von Schnurbein, Stefanie (2016) Norse Revival: Transformations of Germanic
        Neopaganism. Leiden: Brill.                          
      Willinger, Markus (2013) Generation Identity: A Declaration of War against the
        ‘68ers. London: Arktos.                              
      Willinger, Markus (2014) A Europe of Nations: A Declaration of Independence.
        London: Arktos.                                      
      Wolin,Richard(2008)WalterBenjaminmeetstheCosmics:AforgottenWeimar
        moment. Available at: http://www.law.wisc.edu/m/ndkzz/wolin_revised_10-
        13_benjamin_meets_the_cosmics.doc (accessed 1 May 2020).
      Chetan Bhatt is Professor of Sociology in the Department of Sociology,
      London School of Economics and Political Science, and a member of
      LSE Human Rights.                                      
                                                             