[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Transversal Posthumanities            
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2019,Vol.36(6)31–61
        A Theoretical                                        
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2018
        Framework     for the                                
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
        Critical Posthumanities          DOI:10.1177/0263276418771486
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Rosi Braidotti                                       
        Utrecht University                                   
        Abstract                                             
        What are the parameters that define a posthuman knowing subject, her scientific
        credibility and ethical accountability? Taking the posthumanities as an emergent field
        of enquiry based on the convergence of posthumanism and post-anthropocentrism,
        Iarguethatposthumanknowledgeclaimsgobeyondthecritiquesoftheuniversalist
        image of ‘Man’ and of human exceptionalism. The conceptual foundation I envisage
        for the critical posthumanities is a neo-Spinozist monistic ontology that assumes
        radical immanence, i.e. the primacy of intelligent and self-organizing matter.
        Thisimpliesthattheposthumanknowingsubjecthastobeunderstoodasarelational
        embodied and embedded, affective and accountable entity and not only as a
        transcendental consciousness. Two related notions emerge from this claim: firstly,
        the mind-body continuum – i.e. the embrainment of the body and embodiment of
        the mind – and secondly, the nature-culture continuum – i.e. ‘naturecultural’ and
        ‘humanimal’transversalbonding.Thearticleexploresthesekeyconceptualandmeth-
        odological perspectives and discusses the implications of the critical posthumanities
        for practices in the contemporary ‘research’ university.
        Keywords                                             
        contemporary university, critical posthumanities, Deleuze, posthuman ethics,
        posthumanism                                         
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
        This paper argues that posthuman times, and the posthuman subjects of
        knowledgeconstituted within them, areproducingnew fields oftransdis-
        ciplinary knowledge, which I call the critical posthumanities. My work-
        ing definition of the posthuman predicament is the convergence, across
        the spectrum of cognitive capitalism, of posthumanism on the one hand
        and post-anthropocentrism on the other. The former focuses on the
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:RosiBraidotti.Email:r.braidotti@uu.nl
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      32                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      critiqueofthehumanistidealof‘Man’astheallegedlyuniversalmeasure
      of all things, while the latter criticizes species hierarchy and human
      exceptionalism. Equally interdisciplinary in character, they are linked
      toseparatesocialmovementsandtodifferenttheoreticalanddisciplinary
      genealogies that do not necessarily follow from each other. Their con-
      vergence is currently producing a range of posthumanist positions,1 but
      also a return to a variety of neohumanist2 claims. A full overview of
      contemporaryenquiriesaboutwhatconstitutesthebasicunitofreference
      for the human exceeds the scope of this essay.3 What I will try to show
      instead is that the posthuman constitutes a trans-disciplinary field
      of scholarship that is more than the sum of its parts and points to a
      qualitative leap towards the construction of different subjects of know-
      ledge (Braidotti, 2013). My aim is to provide a preliminary theoretical
      framework for this qualitative shift towards the critical or nomadic
      posthumanities and to explore its ethico-political implications.
                                                             
      Neo-Materialist Cartographies                          
      Two inter-related assumptions support my project. The first is that to
      define the posthuman era as the Anthropocene4 is not to doit justice: we
      need to factor in the combination of fast technological advances on the
      onehandandtheexacerbationofeconomicandsocialinequalitiesonthe
      other. Besides, the Anthropocene has already become another
      ‘Anthropomeme’ (Macfarlane, 2016), spawning an array of derivative
      terms, such as ‘Capitalocene’ (Moore, 2015), ‘Anthrop-obscene’
      (Parikka, 2015b), but also: ‘Plasticene’, ‘Plantationocene’ (Tsing, 2015),
      ‘Mis-anthropocene’ and ‘Chthulucene’ (Haraway, 2015). These neolo-
      gisms express an accelerationist tendency and their proliferation evokes
      both excitement and exasperation for thinkers attempting to account
      critically for the posthuman predicament. Instead of adding to this
      discursive inflation, I will take a materialist approach, and inscribe the
      Anthropocene as a multi-layered posthuman predicament that includes
      theenvironmental,socio-economic,andaffectiveandpsychicdimensions
      of our ecologies of belonging (Guattari, 2000).        
        Thesecondassumptionconcernstheimportanceofcartographies,asa
      conceptual off-shoot of neo-materialism. Critical thinking slows
      down the accelerationist trend of proliferating discourses by drawing
      cartographies of the power relations operational in and immanent
      to the production and circulation of knowledge. The specific focus of
      my cartographies is what kind of knowing subjects are we in the
      process of becoming and what discourses underscore the process.
      Cartographies also fulfil a methodological function by providing
      discursive objects of exchange for a dialogical, but also potentially
      antagonistic exchange. The subjects of this exchange compose a rela-
      tional community, defined as a nomadic, transversal ‘assemblage’
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    33      
                                                             
        (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987; Braidotti, 1994) that involves non-human
        actors and technological media. Material, mediated posthuman subjects
        constitute a materially embodied and embedded community, a ‘people’,
        bonded by affirmative ethics.                        
         Being grounded, any cartographic account is necessarily selective,
        partial and never exhaustive. Knowledge-production for me is always
        multiple and collective – hence the unusually large number of biblio-
        graphical cross-references in this essay. Footnotes and bibliographies
        being the expression of democracy in the text, I hope the readers
        will take my over-crowded article as an attempt to compose a missing
        community of posthuman scholars: the essay as assemblage. To sum up:
        a cartography is a theoretically-based and politically-informed account
        of the present that aims at tracking the production of knowledge and
        subjectivity (Braidotti, 1994, 2011a, 2011b) and to expose power both as
        entrapment (potestas) and as empowerment (potentia). 
         One field of immediate cartographic relevance to the posthuman is
        biopolitical scholarship which grew from Foucault’s seminal work on
        the politics of living and dying. Biopolitical scholarship shed new light
        onpowerrelationsinadvancedcapitalism,butitstoppedshortofembra-
        cing the affirmative aspects of the posthuman turn. For instance, while it
        focuses on contemporary biopolitical governance, or ‘the politics of life
        itself’ (Rose, 2007), it also shows residual Kantianism in terms of values.
        Both Bios (Esposito, 2008) and Anthropos Today (Rabinow, 2003) appear
        as fractured categories, but the non-human elements and technological
        actors are not given enough prominence. And yet, the materialist concept
        ofnonhumanlife(zoe)hasemergedascentralnotonlyasvulnerable‘bare
        life’ (Agamben, 1998), but also as a productive and vital force (Braidotti,
        2002). These limitations make the biopolitical an insufficient frame of ref-
        erence for the posthuman, and therefore I have adopted a conceptual
        frame of nomadic becoming (Braidotti, 2011a, 2011b), drawn from neo-
        Spinozist vital ontologies (Deleuze, 1988, 1990).5   
         Subjectivity is not restricted to bound individuals, but is rather a
        co-operative trans-species effort (Margulis and Sagan, 1995) that takes
        place transversally, in-between nature/technology; male/female; black/
        white; local/global; present/past – in assemblages that flow across and
        displace the binaries. These in-between states defy the logic of the
        excluded middle and, although they allow an analytic function to the
        negative, they reject negativity and aim at the production of joyful or
        affirmative values and projects (Lloyd, 1996; Braidotti, 2011b).
        Poststructuralism paved the way for this approach, but the posthuman
        turn materializes it and composes a new ontological framework of
        becoming-subjects.                                   
         Another crucial element of my cartographic approach is the feminist
        politics of locations (Rich, 1987), also known as situated knowledges
        (Harding, 1986, 1991; Haraway, 1988), which I take as the original

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      manifestation of embodied and embedded carnal empiricism. This
      method accounts forone’slocations in terms bothof space (geo-political
      or ecological dimension) and time (historical memory or genealogical
      dimension), thereby grounding political subjectivity. The emphasis on
      immanence marks the rejection of transcendental universalism and
      mind-body dualism. All matter or substance being one and immanent
      to itself, it is intelligent and self-organizing in both human and
      non-human organisms (Lloyd, 1994, 1996; Protevi, 2013). Vital matter
      is driven by the ontological desire for the expression of its innermost
      freedom (conatus). This understanding of matter animates the compos-
      ition of posthuman subjects of knowledge – embedded, embodied and
      yet flowing in a web of relations with human and non-human others.
      Vital neo-materialism will also provide the ontological grounding
      for the critical posthumanities as a transversal field of knowledge.
      More on this later.                                    
        The last main feature of this neo-materialist, vital approach I want to
      emphasize is the idea that critical cartographies are not negative, but
      also entail creativity: they assist us in the process of learning to think
      differently about ourselves, in response to the complexity of our
      times. The aim of an adequate cartography is to bring forth alternative
      figurations or conceptual personae for the kind of knowing subjects
      currently constructed. All figurations are localized and hence immanent
      to specific conditions; for example, the nomadic subjects, or the cyborg,
      are no mere metaphors, but material and semiotic signposts for specific
      geo-political and historical locations. As such, they express grounded
      complex singularities, not universal claims (Braidotti, 2011a). The figur-
      ations supported by cartographic accounts aim at dealing with the
      complexity of power relations. They expose the repressive structures of
      dominantsubject-formations(potestas),butalsotheaffirmativeandtrans-
      formative visions of the subject as nomadic process (potentia). In some
      ways a figuration is the dramatization of processes of becoming, without
      referring to a normative model of subjectivity, let alone a universal one.
        Although the posthuman is empirically grounded, because it is
      embedded and embodied, it functions less as a substantive entity than
      a figuration, or conceptual persona. It is a theoretically-powered carto-
      graphic tool that aims at achieving adequate understanding of these
      processes of undoing the human. It does not define a dystopian future
      condition, but provides a frame to understand the ongoing processes of
      becoming-subjects in our fast-changing times. My argument is that the
      posthuman enables us to track, across a number of interdisciplinary
      fields, the emergence of discourses about the non/in/trans/meta/post-
      human, which are generated by the intersecting critiques of humanism
      and of anthropocentrism. Any lingering notion of human nature is
      replaced by a ‘naturecultures’ continuum (Haraway, 1997, 2003), which
      also brings to an end the categorical distinction between life as bios,

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    35      
                                                             
        the prerogative of Anthropos, as distinct from the life of animals and
        non-humans, or zoe (Braidotti, 2006). What comes to the fore instead
        is new human-non-human linkages, new ‘zoontologies’ (De Fontaney,
        1998; Gray, 2002; Wolfe, 2003), and also complex media-technological
        interfaces (Bono et al., 2008), in the context of the Anthropocene.
        Theposthumanpredicamentis,moreover,framedbytheopportunistic
        commodification of all that lives, which, as I argue below, is the pol-
        itical economy of advanced capitalism. With this in mind, let me
        move onto my cartography of posthuman knowledges and their emer-
        ging subjects.                                       
                                                             
        The Proper Study of the Humanities is No Longer ‘Man’
        The posthuman turn shows that the consensus about the universal value
        of Eurocentric assumptions about ‘Man’ has dissipated and this figur-
        ation of the human is in trouble.6 ‘Man’ as the taxonomic type has now
        become ‘Man the brand’ (Haraway, 1997: 74), or rather: ‘Ex-Man’
        (Massumi, 1998: 60). This ‘anthropological exodus’ produces a colossal
        hybridization of the species (Hardt and Negri, 2000: 215).
         The shift is not met with equal enthusiasm in all quarters. Social the-
        orists from different political backgrounds, such as Habermas (2003),
        Fukuyama (2002), Sloterdijk (2009) and Derrida (in Borradori, 2003),
        express intense anxiety bordering on moral panic about the future of the
        human and the humanist legacy in our advanced technological times.
        Recently, Pope Francis (2015) joined this debate, supplementing
        Catholic dogma on Natural Law, with Naomi Klein’s analysis of the
        destructive role of capitalism (Klein, 2014). Although it is undeniably
        true that the machines are so alive, and the humans so inert (Haraway,
        1985),theevidenceprovidedbyposthumanscholarshipshowsno‘crisis’,
        but a remarkable upsurge of inspiration.             
         On the positive side, the scholarship of anxiety exposes an ethical-
        political paradox that deserves further attention. This paradox splits
        into two issues: the first is that the ‘human’ – which so preoccupies
        legions of thinkers and policy-makers today – never was a universal or
        a neutral term to begin with. It is rather a normative category that
        indexes access to privileges and entitlements. Appeals to the ‘human’
        arealwaysdiscriminatory:theycreatestructuraldistinctionsandinequal-
        ities among different categories of humans, let alone between humans
        and non-humans (Braidotti, 2013, 2016).              
         As a consequence, it is inappropriate to take the posthuman either as
        an apocalyptic or as an intrinsically subversive category, narrowing our
        options down to the binary: extinction-versus-liberation (of the human).
        We need to check both emotional reactions and resist with equal lucidity
        this double fallacy. The ‘posthuman’ is normatively neutral and it
        does not automatically point to the end of the species, let alone to
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      post-power/gender/class/race/species relations between members of the
      species. As a figuration, the posthuman is both situated and partial – it
      does not define the new human condition, but offers a spectrum through
      which we can capture the complexity of ongoing processes of subject-
      formation. In other words, it enables subtler and more complex analyses
      of powers and discourses. They start by questioning who might ‘we’ be,
      whoseanxietytakescentre-stageinpublicdebatesabouttheconvergence
      of posthumanism and post-anthropocentrism. I want to insist that
      the posthuman – a figuration carried by a specific cartographic reading
      of present discursive conditions – can be put to the collective task of
      constructing new subjects of knowledge, through immanent assemblages
      or transversal alliances between multiple actors.      
        Thesecondlayeroftheparadoxexposedbythescholarshipofanxiety
      concerns the tendency to either mourn (apocalyptic variant) or celebrate
      (euphoric variant) the cause of a new humanity, united in and by the
      Anthropocene, as both a vulnerable and insurgent category: ‘we are in
      this together!’ The reinvention of a pan-human is explicit in the conser-
      vative discourse of the Catholic Church, in corporate pan-humanism,
      belligerent military interventionism and UN humanitarianism. It is
      more oblique but equally strong in the progressive Left, where the
      legacy of socialist humanism provides the tools to re-work anxiety into
      political rage. In all cases, we see the emergence of a category – the
      endangered human – both as evanescent and foundational.
        Politically, it is difficult not to read this vulnerable pan-humanity as a
      knee-jerk reaction by the centre – the majority – which Deleuze and
      Guattaridefine(1987)assharplyasanyfeministas:male/white/heterosex-
      ual/owningwivesandchildren/urbanized/speakingastandardlanguage,i.e.
      ‘Man’, or rather by now – ‘ex-Man’. Insofar as the anthropocenic risks of
      climate change threaten the entire planet, however, one should avoid any
      cynicism. Radical epistemologies like feminism and postcolonial theory are
      just as affected by the demise of Man/Anthropos (Chakrabarty, 2009), as
      the universalist ones.                                 
        I propose therefore to deal with the issue conceptually, with the help of
      nomadic or vital materialism. In this framework, the paradox of simultan-
      eous over-exposure and disappearance of the human is only apparent, and
      it dissolves if we approach it with the useful distinction Deleuze and
      Guattari make (1994) within the very notion of the present. The force of
      the present – and the core of its intelligibility – is that it does not coincide
      completelywiththehereandnow.Suchsynchronizationisnevercomplete,
      becauseinaneo-materialistvitalsystem,allhumanandnon-humanentities
      are nomadic subjects-in-process, in perpetual motion, immanent to the
      vitalityofself-orderingmatter.Approachingthepresentthereforeproduces
      a multi-faceted effect: on the one hand the sharp awareness of what we are
      ceasing to be (the end of the actual) and on the other the perception – in
      different degrees of clarity – of what we are in the process of becoming (the

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    37      
                                                             
        actualizationofthevirtual).Bothphenomenaoccuratonce,inanon-linear
        time-continuum.                                      
         Think, for example, of Foucault’s (1970) image of the face of ‘Man’
        drawn on the sand by the seashore, which is gradually erased by the
        waves: is it about extinction or renewal? Foucault’s genealogical
        method shows that it is at the moment of its dissolution that ‘Man’
        emerges as a thinkable category; up until that moment it had not sur-
        faced to the critical eye, being the implicit assumption that supported
        thatsamecategory.Deleuzemovestheanalysisfurther:ifthepresentisa
        complex process, critical philosophy cannot stop at the critique of the
        actual (i.e. of what we are ceasing to be), but needs to move onto
        the creative actualization of thevirtual(i.e. of what weare inthe process
        ofbecoming).Theinterplaybetweenthepresentasactualandthepresent
        as virtual spells the rhythms of subject formation.  
         By extension, the posthuman as cartographic figuration is a branch of
        contemporary critical thought that allows us to think of what ‘we’ are
        ceasing to be– forinstance, theEurocentric category of universal‘Man’.
        It also sustains, however, the effort to account for what ‘we’ are in the
        process of becoming – the multitude of ways in which the human is
        currently being recomposed. Posthuman theory focuses, through
        critical and creative cartographies, on the margins of expression of
        yet unrealized possibilities for overcoming both humanism and
        anthropocentrism by concentrating on the issue: who is this ‘we’ whose
        humanity is now at stake?                            
         If a cartography is the record of both what we are ceasing to be and
        whatweareintheprocessofbecoming,thencriticalthinkingisaboutthe
        creation of new concepts, or navigational tools to help us through the
        complexities of the present, with special focus on the project of actualiz-
        ing the virtual. This signals an intensive, qualitative shift in becoming
        that I connect to affirmative ethics. Creativity – the imagination – con-
        stantly reconnects to the virtual totality of a block of past experiences7
        and affects, which get recomposed as action in the present, thereby rea-
        lizing their unfulfilled potential. This mode of affirmative critique is an
        exercise in temporary and contingent synchronization, which sustains, in
        the present, the activity of actualizing the virtual. This virtual intensity
        is simultaneously after and before us, both past and future, in a flow or
        processofmutation,differentiationorbecoming,whichisthevitamater-
        ial core of thought. We know by now that there is no Greenwich
        Mean Time in knowledge production in the posthuman era.
         So there is no paradox in the simultaneous over-exposure and non-
        existence of the ‘human’, there is no extinction/survival binary, which
        means that there is no justification for panic-stricken re-inventions of a
        vulnerable‘pan-humanity’(‘we’areinthistogether!).Whatwedohaveis
        complexity, embodied and embedded diversity and multiple becomings.
        We are facing the conceptual challenge of having to hold simultaneously

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      38                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      inourmindspotentiallycontradictoryideaslikematerialismandvitality,
      growth and extinction. Concepts flow in a continuous present which
      never fully coincides with a spatio-temporally saturated ‘now’, but goes
      on becoming – yearning towards the virtual. It follows therefore that we
      need to focus our collective efforts upon the projects of defining what
      ‘we’ could become as a species and a set of technologically inter-linked
      material cultures. The aim is to track the multiple, grounded and
      hence specific and diversified ways in which we are becoming knowing
      subjects, as ‘otherwise other’ than the dialectical oppositions and pejora-
      tive differences posited by classical humanist ‘Man’, and the supremacist
      assertions of ‘Anthropos’.                             
                                                             
      Trans-Disciplinary Exuberance                          
      NextIwillarguethattheposthuman,asadynamic,creativeconvergence
      phenomenon, is producing new fields of scholarship. The exuberant
      growth is concentrated in a number of creative trans-disciplinary
      hubs, which have generated their own extra-disciplinary offspring.
      They seldom coincide with the traditional humanities disciplines, and
      are also fuelled by marginal and hybrid fields of knowledge.
        Over the last 30 years the core of theoretical innovation in the huma-
      nities has emerged from a number of often radical and always interdis-
      ciplinary practices that called themselves ‘studies’ (Braidotti, 2013).
      Women’s,gayandlesbian,gender,feministandqueerstudies;race,post-
      colonial and subaltern studies, alongside cultural studies, film, television
      and media studies; are the prototypes of the radical epistemologies that
      have voiced the situated knowledges of the dialectical and structural
      ‘others’ of humanistic ‘Man’.                          
        Anothercrucialgenerativetrans-disciplinaryhubofposthumanknow-
      ledge production is science and technology studies (Stengers, 1997),
      which connects to cultural studies of science (McNeil, 2007); health
      (Shildrick, 2009) and disability (Braidotti and Roets, 2012; Goodley
      et al., 2014); media (Bryld and Lykke, 2000; Smelik and Lykke, 2008);
      topologies of culture and digital media (Lury et al., 2012; Fuller and
      Goffrey, 2013; Parisi 2013) studies.                   
        These ‘studies’ share a number of theoretical premises: firstly, they
      criticize the idea of the human implicitly upheld by the academic huma-
      nities on two grounds: structural anthropocentrism on the one hand and
      in-built Eurocentrism and ‘methodological nationalism’ (Beck, 2007) on
      theother.Spellingthustheendofthe‘monoculturesofthemind’(Shiva,
      1993), they critically dis-engage from the rules, conventions and institu-
      tional protocols of the academic disciplines. This nomadic exodus from
      disciplinary‘homes’shiftsthepointofreferenceawayfromtheauthority
      of the past and onto accountability for the present (as both actual and
      virtual). This is what Foucault and Deleuze called ‘the philosophy of the
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    39      
                                                             
        outside’: thinking of, in, and for the world – a becoming-world of
        knowledge production practices.                      
         Secondly, they are firmly grounded in the present (as actual and
        virtual), which means that they take real-life events seriously, and by
        extension, take power seriously. They are willing to expose the compati-
        bility of rationality and violence, of scientific progress on the one hand
        andpracticesofstructuralexclusionontheother(Said,1978).Theyfulfil
        the cartographic obligation of being both critical – of dominant visions
        ofknowingsubjects–andcreative–byactualizingthevirtualandunreal-
        ized insights and competences of marginalized subjects (Braidotti, 2002,
        2006). Not all these ‘studies’ simply opposed humanism, however: they
        alsoofferedalternativevisionsofthehumanistself,knowledgeandsociety.
        Notions such as a female/feminist humanity (Irigaray, 1993) and black
        humanity (Fanon, 1967) are part of this tradition of more inclusive
        humanism (Braidotti and Gilroy, 2016).               
         The case of women’s and gender studies is emblematic of both the crit-
        ical edge and the creative exuberance of posthuman dis-engagement from
        dominant ideas about the knowing subject. Contemporary feminism has
        predicatedaconcertedexodusfromtheregimeofMan/Anthropos,defined
        as a species that monopolizes the right to access the bodies of all living
        entities. Eco-feminists in particular were always geo-centred and post-
        anthropocentric. A profound sense of non-belonging, of being ‘outsiders
        within’ (Woolf, 1939), infuses feminist literature. Since the 1970s feminists
        (Kristeva, 1980; Barr, 1987, 1993; Haraway, 1992; Creed, 1993), this has
        resulted in an imaginary political alliance with the ‘techno-teratological’
        world (Braidotti, 2002) of the science fiction horror genre. This alliance
        promotes the insurrection of women – as the others of ‘Man’ – and other
        ‘others’, like LBGT+, non-whites (postcolonial, black, Jewish, indigenous
        and native subjects) and non-humans (animals, insects, plants, tress,
        viruses, fungi, bacteria and technological automata).
         Sincethentheempathicbondtonon-human,includingmonstrousand
        alien others, has become a posthuman feminist topos (Braidotti, 2002;
        Creed,2009).Neverquitecertainastothehumanrightsassignedtotheir
        sex(MacKinnon,2007),feministsandLBGT+(HirdandRoberts,2011;
        Gruen and Weil, 2012) have grabbed every opportunity of exiting the
        binary gender system and taking the leap towards posthuman
        formations (Balsamo, 1996; Halberstam, 1995, 2012; Giffney and Hird,
        2008; Livingston and Puar, 2011; Colebrook, 2014b). Trans-species
        alliances enable experiments with sexual diversity, alternative sexualities
        and gendersystems, modelled onthemorphology of non-humanspecies,
        includinginsects(Braidotti,1994;2002;Grosz,1995),starfish(Hayward,
        2011) and micro-organisms (Parisi, 2004). There is a genuine embarrass-
        ment of riches in relation to all references that per necessity cannot
        make it to my bibliography, but there is no question that contemporary
        feminist theory is productively posthuman.8          

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      40                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
        Dis-identifications from ‘Man/Anthropos’ occurred – in the space of
      severalgenerations–alongtheaxesofbecoming-woman/LBGT+(sexu-
      alization); becoming-indigenous/other (racialization) and becoming-
      earth (ecologization). The proliferation of neologisms is telling: if we
      now are ‘humanimals’, trans-corporeal human-animal compounds
      (Alaimo, 2010), or ‘trans-speciated selves’ (Hayward, 2008), then the
      earth and its cosmos have become a political arena. This eco-planetary
      insight and the relationship to non-human life (zoe) are compounded by
      high technological mediation, digital life being a second nature. Given
      that there is no ‘originary humanicity’ (Kirby, 2011: 233) but rather
      ‘originarytechnicity’(Mackenzie,2002),whatusedtobe‘naturecultures’
      hasevolvedinto‘medianatures’ (Parikka,2015a)and‘trans-media’prac-
      tices(King,2011).Amediaecologicalcontinuum(Fuller,2005,2008)can
      sustain a general ecology (Ho¨rl, 2013), foregrounding not just any form
      ofmateriality,butratherageological(Parikka,2015)andterrestrialkind
      of materialism (Braidotti, 2006; Protevi, 2013).       
        What is emerging nowis asecond generation of ‘studies’ areas, genea-
      logically indebted to the first generation in terms of critical aims and
      political affects and commitment to social justice, while addressing
      more directly the issue of anthropocentrism. Significant examples are:
      posthuman/inhuman/non-human studies; posthuman disability, fat,
      sleep, fashion, celebrity, success and diet studies; critical plants studies,
      etc. New media has proliferated into sub-sections and meta-fields: soft-
      ware, internet, game, algorithmic and critical code studies and more.
        Arelatedandequallyprolificfieldofposthumanresearchconcernsthe
      inhuman(e) aspects of our historical condition: conflict and peace
      research studies; post-Soviet/communist studies; human rights studies,
      humanitarian management; migration, mobility, human rights studies;
      trauma, memory and reconciliation studies; security, death, suicide stu-
      dies; extinction studies, and the list is still growing. These successive
      generations of ‘studies’ areas are both institutionally and theoretically
      the motor of critique and creativity. I will argue next that they are cur-
      rently cross-breeding nomadically, generating new discursive practices
      which I call the nomadic or critical posthumanities.   
      Cognitive Capitalism Revisited                         
      BeforeIexpand onthis new phase,however,let me addthatthese devel-
      opmentsdonottakeplace inavoid, butrather within theaxiomatic and
      profit-driven system (Toscano, 2005) of ‘cognitive capitalism’ (Moulier
      Boutang, 2012). This system rests on advanced technologies, the finan-
      cializationoftheeconomyandtheoverwhelmingpowerofthemediaand
      culturalsectors.Thepracticeoflabourinsuchasystemissimultaneously
      highly sophisticated, as it requires cultural and algorithmic fluency, and
      also highly unregulated and hence open to exploitation.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    41      
                                                             
         Advanced capitalism is a differential engine that promotes the quan-
        titative proliferation of multiple options in consumers’ goods and
        actively produces deterritorialized differences for the sake of commodi-
        fication.Thesaturationofthesocialspacebyfast-changingcommodities
        short-circuits the virtual charge of the present, by infecting it with the
        internally contradictory temporality of commodity fetishism (Massumi,
        1992). Commodities never fully appease or release, but keep us coming
        back for more. Addictive and toxic, capitalism is an entropic and
        self-destructive system that ‘eats up’ the future and endangers the very
        sources of its wealth and power (Holland, 2011).     
         The bio-technological pole of this system is based on the economy
        of ‘life as surplus’ (Cooper, 2008), which considers as capital value the
        informational power of living matter itself, its vital, immanent qualities
        and self-organizing capacity. The information-technology side of the
        same economy constructs smart virtual systems, mostly applied to
        ‘data-mining’, an accumulation of information for the purpose of exten-
        sive profiling practices and risk assessments of vast populations.
         As a result, cognitive, advanced capitalism profits from the scientific
        and economic understanding of all that lives. Because life, as it happens,
        is not the exclusive prerogative of humans, this opportunistic bio-genetic
        political economy induces, if not the actual erasure, at least the blurring
        ofthedistinctionbetweenthehumanandotherspecies,whenitcomesto
        profitingfromthem.Seeds,plants,animalsandbacteriafitintothislogic
        of insatiable consumption alongside various specimens of humanity.
        The uniqueness of Anthropos therefore is displaced, producing a func-
        tional form of post-anthropocentrism that spuriously unifies all species
        under the imperative of the market. The excesses of the Capitalocene
        threaten the sustainability of our planet as a whole.
         By extension, posthuman scholarship, which emerges and proliferates
        in such a context, is contiguous and resonates with bio-genetic and
        technologically-mediated advanced capitalism. What prevents it from
        being just an epistemic form of accelerationism?9 The answer is affirma-
        tive ethics, and the political praxis is collective counter-actualization of
        the virtual. The barrier against the negative, entropic frenzy of capitalist
        axiomatic is provided by the politics that ensue from the ethic of affirm-
        ation. The political starts with de-acceleration, through the composition
        of transversalsubject assemblages thatactualizetheunrealized orvirtual
        potential of what Deleuze calls ‘a missing people’. In the old language:
        de-accelerate and contribute to the collective construction of social
        horizons of hope.                                    
         The crucial problem is the speeds of de-/re-territorialization by
        bio-cognitive capitalism and the toxic saturation of the present it
        enacts, to the detriment of the actualization of the virtual. The violent
        erasure,orpassive-aggressiveblockage,ofourcollectivedesiretoexpress
        and materialize virtual potentials affects both subject-formation and

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      42                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      knowledge practices in society. It also impacts on the contemporary uni-
      versity,thescientificcommunityandtheartworld.Howtotellthediffer-
      ence between affirmative and instrumental or opportunistic modes of
      knowledge production is the fundamental question. Because power, in
      my scheme of thought, is a multi-layered and dynamic entity, and
      because as embedded and embodied, relational and affective subjects,
      we are immanent to the very conditions we are trying to change, we
      need to make careful ethical distinction between different speeds
      of both knowledge production – with the predictable margins of institu-
      tional capitalization – and the construction of alternative knowing sub-
      ject formations.                                       
        A neo-materialist vital position offers a robust rebuttal of the accel-
      erationist and profit-minded knowledge practices of bio-mediated, cog-
      nitivecapitalism. Taking‘livingmatter’asazoe-geo-centredprocessthat
      interacts in complex ways with the techno-social, psychic and natural
      environmentsandresiststheover-codingbythecapitalistprofitprinciple
      (and the structural inequalities it entails), I end up on an affirmative
      plane of composition of transversal subjectivities. Subjectivity can
      then be re-defined as an expanded self, whose relational capacity is not
      confined within the human species, but includes non-anthropomorphic
      elements. Zoe, the non-human, vital force of life, is the transversal entity
      that allows us to think across previously segregated species, categories
      and domains. Neo-materialist immanence expands this collective ability
      tothesustainability of ourmodesofknowledgeproduction. Zoe-centred
      egalitarianism is, for me, the core of a posthuman thought that might
      inspire, work with or subtend informational and scientific practices and
      resist the trans-species commodification of life by advanced capitalism
      (Braidotti, 2006).                                     
        The importance of non-human actors in knowledge production sys-
      tems has a distinguished history in science and technology studies,
      and actor network theory is part of this tradition. It advances the
      notion of collaborative networks of human and non-human actors in
      knowledge production systems, providing inspiration for contemporary
      object-ology and object-oriented ontology. By positing generalized sym-
      metry of actors and objects, however, ANT also prevented any
      analysis of the power relations at work between them, notably socio-
      economic differences. Latour dismissed the critical task of epistemology,
      in favour of the flat ontological equality of actors, which results in
      the very problematic move to reject the need for any theorization of
      subjectivity, thus undoing the possibility of a political project altogether.
      With a history of scepticism about leftist politics, critical theory and
      Marxist philosophies of modernity, Latour foregrounded ethnographic
      observationsofthematerialpracticesthatcomposescienceasopposedto
      what he considered as the over-politicized discussions about power and
      knowledge, theorized by Foucault and the other post-structuralists.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    43      
                                                             
        Current discussions about the posthuman predicament revive these trad-
        itionaldividinglines,andformetheyhighlightthenecessityofre-casting
        ethical and political subjectivity for our times.    
                                                             
                                                             
        Towards the Nomadic Posthumanities                   
        Given the proliferation of first and second generation ‘studies’ areas in
        academic settings, their intense and hybrid cross-fertilization and the
        speed with which they are over-coded by and interwoven with ‘cognitive
        capitalism’ (through practices like the academic star system, the
        research audits, the privatization of universities, the emphasis on
        grants and fund-raising, etc.), well may we ask: where do these develop-
        ments leave the academic disciplines of the institutional humanities?
        In what way are they ‘critical’?                     
         My argument is that today the critical posthumanities are emerging
        as post-disciplinary discursive fronts not only around the edges of
        the classical disciplines but also as offshoots of the established ‘studies’.
        They provide the answer to what the humanities can become, in the
        posthuman era, after the decline of the primacy of universalist ‘Man’
        and of supremacist Anthropos. The building block/plane of composition
        for the critical posthumanities is the monistic vitalism I sketched above,
        driven by nomadic, embedded, embodied and technologically-mediated
        subjects (Braidotti, 2011b) and by complex assemblages of human
        and non-human, planetary and cosmic, given and manufactured forces.
        Thiszoe-centredframeworkisfurtherenhancedbytheanalysesofpower
        relations and the social forms of exclusion and dominations perpetuated
        by the current world-order of ‘bio-piracy’ (Shiva, 1997), necro-politics
        (Mbembe, 2003) and systemic dispossession (Sassen, 2014).
         Again, the epistemic accelerationism is telling, as shown by even
        a cursory glance at the terminological diversification of the field.
        The humanities are currently advocated as: inhuman humanities
        (Grosz, 2011), digital (Hayles, 1999, 2005), environmental, transforma-
        tive (Epstein, 2012), emerging, adjectival (De Graef, 2016) and
        nomadic humanities (Stimpson, 2016). Innovative and threatening in
        equal measure, the phenomenon of what I call the critical posthuma-
        nities10 represents both an alternative to the neoliberal governance of
        academic knowledge, dominated by quantitative data and control, and
        a re-negotiation of its terms. As Deleuze and Guattari (1994) argue,
        deepening Foucault’s insight about the multi-layered structure of
        power (as both potestas and potentia): it is not a question of either/or,
        but of ‘and... and’. Contiguity, however, is not the same as complicity,
        and qualitative differences can and must be made. But how?
         There are at least two ways to go about assessing the proliferating
        discourses of the critical posthumanities. The first approach takes them
        as expressing new meta-discursive energy on the part of the disciplines.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      44                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      Fuelledbyself-reflexivity,theyenactanintensiveshiftandgetinspiredto
      move outwards, towards extra-disciplinary encounters with issues and
      events in the real world. In so doing they also re-assert their institutional
      power and renew their profiles.                        
        The second approach takes these developments as a nomadic expan-
      sion of multiple practices and discourses. This rhizomic growth works
      throughrelationalassemblagesandgenerativecross-pollination,whichis
      likely to continue releasing hybrid offspring and new heterogeneous
      assemblages (Deleuze and Guattari, 1994). This is a post-disciplinary
      (Lykke, 2011) approach, fuelled by the active desire to actualize
      unprecedented modes of epistemic relations. Nomadic subjects produce
      nomadic humanities (Stimpson, 2016).                   
        In both cases, the defining feature of the critical posthumanities,
      is their ‘supra-disciplinary’ character. I propose to approach both the
      traditional disciplines and the ‘studies’ as a constitutive block, composed
      by the transformation of the classical disciplines and the growth of the
      infra-disciplinary ‘studies’ alike, with both of them shifting under mul-
      tiple pressures. A different affect is at work as well. The point of encoun-
      ter or assemblage of the critical posthumanities acknowledges the
      porous nature not only of their institutional boundaries but also of
      their epistemic core, which gets redefined in terms of relational capacity.
      Thedrivingforceforknowledgeproductionisthereforenotthequestfor
      disciplinarypurity,ortheinspirationalforceofradicaldissent,butrather
      themodesofrelationthesediscourses areable andwilling toopenupto.
      They prosper to the extent that they show the ability and the willingness
      to move on, acting on their supra-disciplinarity sensibility so that move-
      mentcan besetin actiontowards aqualitatively new approach.This isa
      nomadic shift towards the critical posthumanities.     
        Butthistakesmeimmediatelytothenextquestion:whatarethecodes
      and modes of re/territorialization of these new, supra-disciplinary fields
      of knowledge? How do they escape from epistemic accelerationism?
      To take the two pillars of the posthumanities – the environmental and
      the digital humanities – what meta-patterns of institutional development
      can we detect in their recent exponential growth? What can make them
      nomadic and ‘critical’?                                
        Let’staketheenvironmentalfirst;ifwetakeafirstmeta-patternbased
      on majoritarian formations, identical with and supportive of neoliberal
      economics, we will encounter the dominant institutional narrative and
      practice. For instance, let us say that comparative literature, in the
      framework of the Anthropocene, after generating eco-criticism and
      animal and plant studies, then joined forces with larger assemblages of
      multi-disciplinary components (mostly social sciences, anthropology,
      geology and environmental sciences, and to corporate ideas of sustain-
      ability)andre-codeditsfieldofactivityastheenvironmentalhumanities.
      The field is so dynamic, it seems unstoppable: it has already sub-divided

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    45      
                                                             
        into the ‘green humanities’, focused on the earth, and the ‘blue
        humanities’, concentrating on water. It claims not only one but
        several specialized scholarly journals11 and functions like an established
        academic discipline.                                 
         In an analogous way, the dominant or molar narrative about the
        digital humanities proposes a straight development from media studies,
        via the application of computing methods to humanities ‘content’, i.e.
        databasesofbiblicaltexts,the3Dscanningofarchaeologicalfinds,orthe
        digitization of musical scores. This posits human-technological relations
        asamajorresearchtheme.Itresultsinaquantitativeexplosionofstudies
        of non-human objects and themes. Power being productive as well as
        prohibitive, the neoliberal system finds ways to capitalize also on the
        marginal and the molecular formations, recomposing them as multiple
        molarities (i.e. billions of Facebook pages).        
         To pursue my case, let us say that media studies, affected by cognitive
        capitalism, encountered computational sciences and cultural studies
        and mutated into new media studies, then into algorithmic and digital
        mediastudies, whichthenjoinedforces withlarger assemblagesof multi-
        disciplinary components (mostly political ecology, cognitive sciences and
        philosophy) to produce the digital humanities. The field, by now, is so
        advanced that it can boast at least six specialized journals, its
        ownadvancedcompanion(Schreibmanetal.,2004)andaninternational
        network of institutionalized DH centres.12           
         Butisthismajoritarianmeta-patternallthereis?Towhatextentisthis
        meta-pattern driven by the speed of re-territorialization of neoliberal
        economics, and thus limited by it? Many major ‘research universities’
        in the world today can boast digital and environmental humanities cen-
        tres or institutes. Such enthusiasm for trans-disciplinary practices can
        hardly be gratuitous, especially within cognitive capitalism. Following
        the analysis of the critical ‘studies’ above, I would argue that the critical
        posthumanities are a constitutive block of supra-disciplinary discourses
        that compose a meta-pattern indexed on the becoming-minoritarian
        of knowing subjects and knowledge practices. They are carried by
        affirmative ethical forces.                          
         These minoritarian developments do not prevent, however, the
        recurrenceofpatternsofexclusion.Sowhatdoesitsayaboutthecontem-
        porary posthumanities, that so few institutions have embraced ‘feminist/
        queer/migrant/poor/de-colonial/diasporic/diseased humanities’? The
        speed of de-territorialization of these minor subjects of knowledge
        is clearly of an altogether different order from the majority-driven epi-
        stemic acceleration. Cognitive capitalism cannot or does not want to
        over-code these minoritarian subjects to the same extent as it territorial-
        izesthemoreprofitableones.Butitdoespick‘starspecimens’fromthese
        minor areas, without granting them organizational charts and funds.
        This disjunction between dominant/marginal, or majoritarian/minor,

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      46                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      however, is also a strength, and it grants minor subjects the political
      potential of carrying alternative modes of becoming – a different meta-
      pattern that actualizes what I call ‘the missing peoples’. I will return to
      them after a brief theoretical clarification of this disjunction.
                                                             
                                                             
      Neo-Materialist Epistemology                           
      Thinking–inphilosophy,artandscience–istheconceptualcounterpart
      of the ability to enter modes of relation, to affect and be affected, sus-
      taining qualitative shifts and creative tensions accordingly. Escaping the
      gravitational pull of logocentric systems of thought, critical/creative
      nomadic thought pursues the actualization of transversal relations,
      inhabited by a vitalist and materialist multi-directional affectivity that
      works in terms of transpositions, that is to say generative cross-pollina-
      tion and hybrid inter-connections (Crist, 2013; Bastian et al., 2017)
      Thinking is indeed the stuff of the world (Alaimo, 2014).
        This stance produces a crucial distinction between quantitative or
      extensive and qualitative or intensive states, which Deleuze (1988)
      adapts from Spinoza’s ethical system. For instance, my cartography
      shows a clear quantitative proliferation of discourses generated from
      posthuman locations. This has produced a series of new ‘objects’ of
      studies, many of which are not about the human, but rather non-
      human agents, technological artefacts, animals, things, etc. What is hap-
      pening now is that these ‘objects’ have been itemized and quantified for
      the neoliberal academic market, generating new fields of enquiry. Does
      thatmean that anybody researching objects/things can claim to be doing
      the critical posthumanities, in a posthumanistic and post-anthropo-
      centric manner? Is such a quantitative proliferation of discourses
      enough to sustain the claim to a paradigmatic shift? I hardly think so.
        My argument is that a merely quantitative spread without qualitative
      shifts is an insufficient condition for the production of new concepts and
      conceptual practices. In order to set up credible and rigorous critical
      posthumanities, we need a qualitative move. The qualitative criteria
      I want to suggest are: supra-disciplinarity, meta-discursivity, material
      grounding, nomadic generative force and affirmative ethics. These gen-
      eral principles get operationalized in a series of methodological guide-
      lines, which include: cartographic accuracy, with the corollary of ethical
      accountability, and thecombination of critique with creativity, including
      aflairforparadoxesandtherecognitionofthespecificityofartpractices.
      Other criteria are: non-linearity, the powers of memory and the imagin-
      ation and the strategy of de-familiarization (Braidotti, 2013).
        I cannot go into all of these criteria here, so let me just highlight the
      crucial ones. For instance: non-linearity is in-built into rhizomic logic.
      It is also necessary to cope with the complexity of contemporary science
      and the fact that the global economy functions in a web-like, scattered

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    47      
                                                             
        andpoly-centredway.Theheteroglossiaofcontemporarydatadefiesthe
        logic of the excluded middle and demands complex topologies of know-
        ledge, for subjects structured by multi-directional relationality. Critical
        reason today is contingent and nomadic in character. 
         Translated into temporal terms, following Deleuze, linearity is the
        dominant mode of Chronos – the keeper of institutional time
        and upholder of the authority of the past – as opposed to the dynamic,
        insurgent and more cyclical time of becoming or Aion. Applied to know-
        ledge production practices, Chronos supports ‘royal’ – institutionally
        implemented and well-funded – science/knowledge, compatible with
        the economic imperatives of advanced capitalism and its ‘cognitive
        excursions into living matter’ (Bonta and Protevi, 2004). Aion, on the
        other hand, produces ‘minor’ – underfunded and marginalized – science/
        knowledge, which is, however, ethically transformative and politically
        empowering. One is sedentary and protocol-bound; the other is nomadic
        and defines the research process as the creation of new concepts.
         Thevitalmaterialistcontinuumsustainstheepistemologyofbecoming
        that is the conceptual motor of the critical posthumanities. It also sup-
        ports a new parallelism between philosophy, the sciences and the arts
        (Deleuze and Guattari, 1994). Bonta and Protevi (2004) stress that
        Deleuze’s ‘geo-philosophy’ redefines the relationship between the ‘two
        cultures’ of the ‘subtle’ (humanities) and ‘hard’ (natural) sciences and
        encourages new creative engagements between them. De Landa (2002)
        praises the intensive mode of Deleuzian science for its anti-essentialism
        and points out that ‘minor’ science also replaces typological thinking.
        Thevirtualandintensivebecomingreplacestherulingprincipleofresem-
        blance, identity, analogy and opposition. The continuity between the
        present and the actual, Chronos and Aion,activates multiple genealogical
        lines of resonance (Deleuze, 1988).                  
         To apply all this to the distinction I made earlier between different
        speeds of de-/re-territorialization of contemporary knowledge practices,
        it is clear that the critical posthumanities are caught in the accelerating
        spinoftheneoliberallogicofcapitalizingonlifeitself.Theyaredevelop-
        ing faster than the academic institutions can keep up with and they are
        growing either from the trans-disciplinary ‘studies’, or in the ‘trading
        zones’ (Galison, 1997) between the university, social movements and
        corporate interests. To describe this multi-faceted model of development
        as a ‘crisis’ of the humanities is neither accurate nor particularly helpful.
        The question is rather how far do both the ‘studies’ (notably the second
        generation) and the posthumanities co-exist with and even co-construct
        the profit-oriented re-acquisitions of life as capital – both financial
        and cognitive – that is the core of advanced capitalism? The distinction
        I seek is ethical, but its effects are political: it is about what kind
        of affirmative assemblages we are capable of sustaining, knowing that
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      48                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      their political force lies in actualizing ‘collective imaginings’ (Gatens and
      Lloyd, 1999).                                          
        Complexity becomes – again – the operative word in distinguishing
      between actualized states of ‘royal science’ and the virtual becoming of
      ‘minorscience’.Aneo-materialistvisionofmatterasauto-poeticcallsfor
      a re-tuning of the scientific laws according to a view of the subject of
      knowledge as a complex singularity, an affective assemblage, and a rela-
      tional vitalist entity. The zoe-driven, eco-sophical and geo-centred turn
      that sustains the critical posthumanities, therefore, does not only take
      the form of a quantitative proliferation of objects of study, but also
      qualitative and methodological shifts. This ontological frame inflects
      the epistemological conceptions. In a world haunted by regressions of
      all kinds, the critical posthumanities actualize an immanent politics that
      avoids the rhetorical generalizations about pan-humanity. They offer
      tool-kits to address the situated and complex singularity of contempor-
      ary subjects of knowledge.                             
        The combination of supra-disciplinary hybridization with the force of
      vital zoe-geo-centrism pushes the task of de-familiarizing our habits of
      thought to the edge of a qualitative shift. We are encouraged to expand
      from the postcolonial injunction of ‘unlearning our privilege as our loss’
      (Spivak,1990:9)toaqualitativeassessmentofourrelationaldeficitsand
      injuries, notably towards non-human others. The frame of reference
      becomes the world, in all its open-ended, inter-relational, transnational,
      multi-sexed, and trans-species flows of becoming: a native or vernacular
      form of cosmopolitanism (Bhabha, 1996; Braidotti, 2006, 2013).
        These are the building blocks of qualitative shifts towards the critical
      posthumanities, as opposed to the exploitation of quantitative non-
      human objects of study. At present the institutional alternative to the
      critical posthumanities is already in place. The Oxford Institute for the
      Future of Humanity embodies the hegemonic model of the posthuman
      as trans-humanism, implemented through a programme called ‘super-
      intelligence’. It combines a humanistic belief in the perfectibility of
      man through scientific rationality with a programme of human enhance-
      ment. The director Nick Bostrom pledges allegiance to the European
      Enlightenment and adopts a moralizing discourse to combine
      brain research with robotics and computational sciences, plus clinical
      psychology and analytic philosophy, to define the posthuman as a
      super-human meta-rationalist entity. Bostrom is a champion of the
      Capitalocene, and his approach receives ample economic support from
      boththescientificcommunity–‘royalscience’–andthecorporateworld.
        What I want to propose is an alternative to this approach, namely:
      ‘minor science’ and nomadic critical posthumanities.13 A different vision
      of mediated matter supports the politics of immanence by opening up
      margins of negotiation within the re-territorializations and networked
      clusters of interest of cognitive capitalism. The overflowing codes of

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    49      
                                                             
        capital never fully saturate the processes of becoming, just as the present
        is not saturated, but ever open to the actual. Consequently, the ‘minor’
        discourses always contain margins of dis-enfranchisement from ‘royal
        science’, because power is not a single entity, but a multi-layered,
        dynamic and strategic process.                       
         Thus we could say that the critical posthumanities, on the plateau of
        ‘royal science’, are propelled by powerful financial interests. On the axis
        of ‘minor science’, however, the growth takes the non-profit form of
        inter-breeding and cross-pollinating through multiple missing links and
        liminal spaces. This does not mean that anything goes, but rather
        that nomadic multi-directionality is the rule for ‘minor’ sciences and
        related knowledge production systems. Let us keep in mind, however,
        the central tenet of neo-materialist ontology, namely that these plateaus
        are not dialectically distinct and opposed, but rather contiguous and
        co-constructed. To be more exact: the nomadic lines of flight of minor
        sciences cut across, re-territorialize and re-compose the dominant know-
        ledge production systems precisely through creating multiple missing
        links, opening generative cracks and inhabiting liminal spaces. If there
        is only one matter, then there is no uncontaminated, pure ‘outside’ to
        power; all we have is the stubborn labour of operationalizing critical
        spaces within, beneath and beyond the present – as the record of both
        what we are ceasing to be and what we are in the process of becoming.
         The only effective materialism today being the politics of radical
        immanence, the task of critical theory consists in activating subjects to
        enter into new affective transversal assemblages, to co-create alternative
        ethical forces and political codes – in other words, to compose a
        missing people.                                      
        The Missing Peoples’ Humanities                      
        Because of their highly specialized character, the critical posthumanities
        are framing multiple planes of organization of knowledge. As a result, is
        thereariskofre-segregatingthecriticaldiscoursesofthenewposthuman
        landscape? To return to the disjunction mentioned before, what do we
        make of the fact that so few institutional meta-patterns have emerged
        around the ‘feminist/queer/migrant/poor/de-colonial/diasporic/diseased
        humanities’? What is the speed and intensity of these de-territorializa-
        tions, in relation to those of ‘royal science’?      
         Fortunately, the rhizomatic energy of the field is already providing
        answers: the strength of minoritarian subjects consists in their capacity
        tocarryoutalternativemodesofbecomingandtransversalrelationsthat
        break up segregational patterns. New border-crossings are being set
        up that aim at actualizing the virtual knowledges and visions of these
        missing peoples. For instance, since Rob Nixon’s seminal work on slow
        violence (2011), the missing links between postcolonial theories, the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      50                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      environmental humanities and indigenous epistemologies have been
      exposed and analysed, resulting in growing convergence between them.
      Arguing that the status of environmental activism among the poor in the
      Global South has shifted towards the transnational environmental justice
      movement and the assessment of damaged caused by warfare, Nixon pro-
      posestodevelopnewcrossoverdialoguesbetweenthesemovementsandthe
      –bynow already‘classical’–environmentalhumanities.Atthe levelofthe
      political economy of the posthumanities, this results in the production of
      new areas of studies that crossover the complex post-anthropocentric axes
      of enquiry. Postcolonial environmental humanities come to the fore; trans-
      national environmental literature also emerges as a crossover between
      Native American studies and other indigenous studies areas.
        Similar developments are on the way to fill in missing links in the
      digital humanities. For instance, relying on the work of pioneers
      like Lisa Nakamura (2002), Ponzanesi and Leurs (2014) claim that
      postcolonial digital humanities is now a fully constituted field,
      digital media providing the most comprehensive platform to re-think
      transnational spaces and contexts.14 These new assemblages pursue the
      aimsof‘classical’postcolonialstudies,acrossthere-territorializeddigital
      humanities platform, into the complexity of ‘minor science’. The pro-
      ject of de-colonizing new media is timely, considering that the field
      is co-extensive with corporate and institutional interests that make it
      indispensable for economic growth and the war on terror.
        The idea that the adoption of digital technologies can exacerbate the
      devastation of indigenous ways of knowing is also central to Mignolo’s
      decolonial movement. It results in a call for ‘de-linking’ digital
      media from the disastrous legacy of European colonialism and
      western modernity (2011: 122–3). This results in new alliances between
      environmentalists and legal specialists, indigenous and non-western
      epistemologies, First Nation peoples, new media activists, IT engineers
      and anti-globalization forces, which constitute a significant example of
      new political assemblages.15 They have produced the decolonial digital
      humanities,forexampletheHastacScholarsForum,16explicitlyinspired
      by Mignolo’s work.                                     
        Thesetheoreticallysophisticatedtransversaldiscoursescombineatten-
      tiontotheearthwith enduringcareforthepeoplewholiveclosest tothe
      earth – indigenous populations – thus raising the ethical and political
      stakes.Thecritiqueofwesternimperialismandracismprovidesanadded
      critical distance – an extra layer of dis-identification – that positions
      these posthuman critical thinkers closer to the dispossessed and the
      disempowered, adding that many of those are neither human nor neces-
      sarily anthropomorphic. Many claim non-western indigenous humanism
      as their platform (Bignall et al., 2016).              
        Itwouldbeintellectually lazytotaketheongoingproliferationofnew
      discourses as the expression of relativism, and it may be tempting but

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    51      
                                                             
        fallacious to simply read the fast rate of growth of the critical posthu-
        manitiesasself-generating.Thefactthatrhizomicknowledgeproduction
        backed by the internet maybe going viral does not make it spontaneous.
        Themultiplehybridconnectionsofthe‘minorsciences’thatsustainthese
        new epistemological openings are the result of the hard work of commu-
        nities of thinkers and activists – alternative collective assemblages – that
        reconstitutenotonlythemissinglinksinacademicpractices,butalsoand
        especially the missing people.                       
         In what way were they ‘missing’ to begin with? Whether we look at
        indigenous knowledge systems, at feminists, queers, otherwise enabled,
        non-humans or technologically-mediated existences, these are real-life
        subjects whose knowledge never made it into any of the official carto-
        graphies. The struggle for their visibility and emergence drives the
        radical politics of immanence, aimed at actualizing minority-driven
        knowledges through transversal alliances. The people who were empiric-
        ally missing – even from ‘minor science’ – get constituted as political
        subjects of knowledge through such alliances.        
         But the other missing people are the virtual ones. As I argued earlier,
        within a neo-materialist frame, the political – that is to say the actual-
        ization of the virtual – is driven by the ethics of affirmation. This entails
        the overthrowing of negativity through the recasting of the oppositional,
        resisting self (‘I would prefer not to’) into a collective assemblage (‘we’).
        This transversal alliance today involves non-human agents, technologic-
        ally-mediated elements, earth-others (land, waters, plants, animals)
        and non-human inorganic agents (plastic, wires, information highways,
        algorithms,etc.).Aposthumanethicalpraxisinvolvestheformationofa
        new alliance, a new people.                          
         Ifthepresentistherecordofwhatweareceasingtobe,andatpresent
        it records the decline of ‘Man/Anthropos’ and his humanities, but if it is
        also the trigger for what we are in the process of becoming-subject, then
        the missing people is an emerging category, as are the posthumanities.
        This emergence phenomenon refers to a complex singularity, expressing
        the embedded, embodied, relational and affective forces that generate
        patternsofbecoming,ofminorscience,ofintensiveshifts.Theactivating
        factor in the politics of immanence is a plane of transposition of forces –
        in both spatial and temporal terms – from past to future and from the
        virtual to the actual. It is the actualization of a virtuality, travelling at
        different speed from capitalist acceleration.        
         The point of this actualization is to provide an adequate expression of
        what bodies – as both embodied and embrained – can do and think and
        enact. Adequate to what? Adequate to what the missing peoples – the
        embodied, embrained, relational, affective, subjects as transversal assem-
        blages – can do, in terms of sustaining intensity, processing negativity
        and producing affirmation. Adequate to the ethical task of turning the
        painful experience of inexistence into generative relational encounters

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      52                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      and knowledge production. This is liberation through the understanding
      of our bondage, as Spinoza teaches us: it extracts knowledge and activ-
      ism from pain via the transformation of the negative. The politics of
      immanence compose planes of becoming for a missing people that was
      never fully part of the ‘human’, understood as the ‘Man of Reason’,
      whose crisis so preoccupies the humanities today. Deleuze and
      Guattari nail it: the ‘human’ is just a vector of becoming; we need to
      compose a new people and a new earth.                  
        This politics of radical immanence – to actualize the emergence of a
      missingpeople–alsoexposestheweaknessofthereactivere-composition
      of pan-humanity as a threatened category, the vulnerable cosmopolitan-
      ismImentionedearlier.Insteadoftakingflightintoanabstractideaofa
      ‘new’ pan-human, bonded in negative passions like fear of extinction, in
      a world risk society (Beck, 1999), I want to plea for monistic affirmative
      politics grounded on immanent inter-connections and generative differ-
      ences: a transversal composition of multiple assemblages of active min-
      oritarian subjects, of many ‘people’ who are no longer missing.
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      This cartography demonstrates both the exuberance and the process-
      ontology underscoring something we may call the posthuman
      subject. The category appears at the moment of the evanescence of
      humanist Man and supremacist Anthropos. It is less a concept than a
      conceptual persona, a navigational tool that helps us illuminate contem-
      porary discursive and material power formations.       
        I have argued that the proliferation of trans-disciplinary discourses –
      as ‘studies’ and as the critical posthumanities – is such as to warrant
      serious scholarly credentials. It entails ‘royal science’ formations but
      also multiple assemblages of ‘minor science’. I have argued that we are
      currently confronted by not just a quantitative growth of areas of
      study and quantified non-human ‘objects’ of research, but rather a
      qualitative shift. I have framed this shift within a vital, neo-materialist
      epistemology that argues for a naturecultural and medianaturecultural
      continuum, within the politics of matter as auto-poietic, sym-poietic and
      hence relational.                                      
        This framework provides theoretical grounding for the emergence
      of the critical posthumanities as a supra-disciplinary, rhizomic field of
      contemporary knowledge production that is contiguous with, but not
      identicalto,theepistemicaccelerationismofcognitivecapitalism.Itfunc-
      tions at different speeds, moves on different time-lines and is fuelled by
      radically different ethical affects. The novelty of the critical posthuma-
      nities, their ‘newness’, if you wish, is defined by the split temporality of
      the present as both what we are ceasing to be and what we are in the
      process of becoming. They design a horizon of becoming – an academic
                                                             

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    53      
                                                             
        ‘minor science’ – that the contemporary university and especially
        the academic humanities could benefit from. This opening out is multi-
        directional: it involves social and cultural movements, new kinds of
        economically productive practices in a market economy liberated form
        capitalist axioms, and multiple curiosity-driven knowledge practices that
        do not coincide with the profit motive of cognitive capitalism.
         Power being multi-layered (potestas and potentia); the contemporary
        being multi-dimensional (the present and the actual); time being multi-
        directional(ChronosandAion),andcognitivecapitalismbeingtunedinto
        bio-genetics and informational codes – there is nothing left for critical
        thinkerstodootherthantopursuetheposthuman,alltoohumanpraxis
        of speaking truth to power and working towards the composition of
        planes of immanence for missing peoples. Instead of new generalizations
        about an engendered pan-humanity, we need sharper focus on the com-
        plex singularities that constitute our respective locations. The critical
        posthumanities can be the epistemological vehicle for this project.
         ‘We’ – the dwellers of this planet at this point in time – are inter-
        connected, but also internally fractured. Class, race, gender and sexual
        orientations, age and able-bodiedness continue to function as significant
        markersinframingandpolicingaccesstonormal‘humanity’.Thecritical
        posthumanities provide a diversified array of the changing perceptions
        and formations of the ‘human’ in the posthuman era. This field is not
        aiming at anything like a consensus about a new ‘humanity’, but it gives
        us a frame for the actualization of the many missing people, whose
        ‘minor’ or nomadic knowledge is the breeding ground for possible
        futures.Theneo-materialistethicsofaffirmationthatsustainthecomplex
        re-compositionofminorscienceinthecriticalposthumanitiesisgivingus
        a measure of what we are actually in the process of becoming.
        Notes                                                
        1. See the different kinds of posthumanism: insurgent (Papadopoulos, 2010);
          speculative (Sterling, 2014: Roden, 2014); cultural (Herbrechter, 2013) and
          literary (Nayar, 2013); trans-humanism (Bostrom, 2014); meta-humanism
          (Ferrando, 2013) and a-humanism (MacCormack, 2014). There is already a
          posthuman manifesto (Pepperell, 2003) and a posthumanities book series
          (Wolfe, 2010).                                     
        2. These range from the classical humanism of Martha Nussbaum (1999) to
          postcolonial (Gilroy, 2016), queer (Butler, 2004) and mortality-bound
          humanism (Critchley, 2014), to name just a few.    
        3. For an overview see Braidotti and Hlavajova (forthcoming).
        4. The term ‘Anthropocene’, coined in 2002 by Nobel Prize winner Paul
          Crutzen, describes the current geological era as dominated by human
          action through technological mediation, consumerism and destruction of
          the resources of planet earth. It was officially adopted by the International
          Geological Congress in South Africa in August 2016.
                                                             

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      54                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
       5. Neo-materialism is also caught in epistemic accelerationism at present: the
         ‘matter-realism’ (Fraser et al., 2006), feminist neo-materialism (Braidotti,
         1991; Alaimo and Hekman, 2008; Coole and Frost, 2010; Kirby, 2011;
         Dolphijn and Van der Tuin, 2012); inventive life (Fraser et al., 2006); gen-
         erative and viroid life (Ansell-Pearson, 1997, 1999); carnal life (Sobchack,
         2004) and vibrant matter (Bennett, 2010).           
       6. Another series of neologisms marks this shift: the non-human (Raffnsoe,
         2013); the inhuman (Lyotard, 1989); the post-anthropocentric as a meta-
         morphic entity (Clarke, 2008); the multi-species (Tsing, 2015); posthuman
         personhood (Wennemann, 2013); the ‘new’ human (Rosendhal Thomsen,
         2013); and posthuman performativity (Barad, 2007). Extinction of life on
         earth (Lovelock, 2009; Van Dooren, 2014), and of the human (Colebrook,
         2014a, 2014b), forecloses any posthuman future (Kroker, 2014).
       7. See also MacCormack (2012).                        
       8. For an overview see Braidotti (2015, 2017).        
       9. With thanks to Sarah Nuttal.                       
      10. See also: medical; bio-humanities; energy; public; civic; community; global;
         ecological; sustainable; interactive; organic; neural-evolutionary; entrepre-
         neurial; translational; greater; resilient, etc., etc.
      11. See the two major ones: http://environmentalhumanities.org/; http://www.
         resiliencejournal.org/                              
      12. This is the CenterNet Network that publishes the DH Commons: http://
         www.dhcenternet.org/                                
      13. A model is the Linkoping University’s Feminist Posthumanities Hub:
         https://www.tema.liu.se/tema-g/Posthuman/posthumanities-hub?l¼en
      14. See also the Postcolonial Digital Humanities blog and website: http://
         dhpoco.org/                                         
      15. See, for instance, the land/media/indigenous project based in British
         Columbia (Bleck et al., 2013).                      
      16. Co-ordinated by Micha Ca´rdenas, Noha F. Beydon and Alainya Kavaloski;
         see the website: http://www.hastac.org/forums/colonial-legacies-postcolonial-
         realities-and-decolonial-futures-digital-media. With thanks to Matthew
         Fuller.                                             
      References                                             
      Agamben, Giorgio (1998) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life.
        Stanford: Stanford University Press.                 
      Alaimo, Stacey (2010) Bodily Natures: Science, Environment, and the Material
        Self. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.         
      Alaimo, Stacey (2014) Thinking asthe stuff ofthe world. O-Zone: A Journal of
        Object-Oriented Studies 1.                           
      Alaimo, Stacey and Hekman, Susan (eds) (2008) Material Feminisms.
        Bloomington: Indiana University Press.               
      Ansell Pearson, Keith (1997) Viroid Life: Perspectives on Nietzsche and the
        Transhuman Condition. London and New York: Routledge.
      Ansell Pearson, Keith (1999) Germinal Life: The Difference and Repetition of
        Deleuze. London and New York: Routledge.             
      Badmington, Neil (2003) Theorizing posthumanism. Cultural Critique 53(1):
        10–27.                                               

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    55      
                                                             
        Balsamo, Anne M (1996) Technologies of the Gendered Body: Reading Cyborg
         Women. Durham: Duke University Press.               
        Barad, Karen (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the
         Entanglement of Matter and Meaning. Durham: Duke University Press.
        Barr, Marleen S (1987) Alien to Femininity: Speculative Fiction and Feminist
         Theory. Westport: Greenwood Press.                  
        Barr, Marleen S (1993) Lost in Space: Probing Feminist Science Fiction and
         Beyond. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
        Bastian, Michelle et al. (2017) Participatory Research in More-than-Human
         Worlds. London: Routledge.                          
        Beck, Ulrich (1999) World Risk Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Beck, Ulrich (2007) The cosmopolitan condition: Why methodological nation-
         alism fails. Theory, Culture & Society 24(7/8): 286–290.
        Bennett, Jane (2010) Vibrant Matter. A Political Ecology of Things. Durham:
         Duke University Press.                              
        Bhabha, Homi (1996) Unsatisfied: Notes on vernacular cosmopolitanism. In:
         Garcia-Morena, Laura and Pfeifer, Peter C (eds) Text and Nation. London:
         Camden House.                                       
        Bignall,Simone,Hemming,SteveandRigney,Daryle(2016)Theecosophiesfor
         the Anthropocene: Environmental governance, continental posthumanism
         and indigenous expressivism. Deleuze Studies 10(4): 455–478.
        Bleck, Nancy, Dodds, Katherine and Williams, Bill (2013) Picturing
         Transformations. Vancouver: Figure 1 Publishing.    
        Bono,JamesJ,Dean,TimandZiarek,EwaP(2008)ATimefortheHumanities:
         Futurity and the Limits of Autonomy. Fordham: Fordham University Press.
        Bonta,MarkandProtevi, John(2004)Deleuze andGeophilosophy: AGuideand
         Glossary. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.    
        Borradori,Giovanna(2003)PhilosophyinaTimeofTerror.Chicago:University
         of Chicago Press.                                   
        Bostrom, Nick (2014) Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies. Oxford:
         Oxford University Press.                            
        Braidotti, Rosi (1994) Nomadic Subjects: Embodiment and Sexual Difference in
         Contemporary Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
        Braidotti, Rosi (2002) Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of
         Becoming. Oxford: Blackwell.                        
        Braidotti, Rosi (2006) Transpositions: On Nomadic Ethics. Cambridge: Polity
         Press.                                              
        Braidotti,Rosi(2011a)NomadicSubjects:EmbodimentandSexualDifferencein
         Contemporary Feminist Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
        Braidotti, Rosi (2011b) Nomadic Theory: The Portable Rosi Braidotti.
         New York: Columbia University Press.                
        Braidotti, Rosi (2013) The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Braidotti, Rosi (2015) The posthuman in feminist theory. In: Disch, Lisa and
         Hawkesworth, Mary (eds) Oxford Handbook of Feminist Theory. Oxford:
         Oxford University Press.                            
        Braidotti, Rosi (2016) The contested posthumanities. In: Braidotti, Rosi and
         Gilroy, Paul (eds) Contesting Humanities. London: Bloomsbury Academic.

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      56                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      Braidotti, Rosi (2017) Four theses on posthuman feminism. In: Grusin,
        Richard (ed.) Anthropocene Feminism. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     
      Braidotti, Rosi and Gilroy, Paul (eds) (2016) Contesting Humanities. London:
        Bloomsbury Academic.                                 
      Braidotti,Rosi,andHlavajova,Maria(eds)(forthcoming)PosthumanGlossary.
        London: Bloomsbury Academic.                         
      Braidotti,RosiandRoets,Griets(2012)Nomadologyandsubjectivity:Deleuze,
        Guattari and critical disability studies. In: Goodley, Dan, Hughes, Bill and
        Davis, Lennard (eds) Disability and Social Theory. New York: Palgrave
        Macmillan.                                           
      Bryld, Mette and Lykke, Nina (2000) Cosmodolphins: Feminist Cultural Studies
        of Technology, Animals and the Sacred. New York: Zed Books.
      Butler, Judith (2004) Precarious Lives. London: Verso Books.
      Chakrabarty,Dipesh(2009)Theclimateofhistory:Fourtheses.CriticalEnquiry
        35: 197–222.                                         
      Clarke, Bruce (2008) Posthuman Metamorphosis: Narrative and Systems.
        New York: Fordham University Press.                  
      Colebrook, Claire (2014a) Death of the Posthuman. Ann Arbor: Open
        Humanities Press.                                    
      Colebrook, Claire (2014b) Sex After Life: Essays on Extinction, Vol. 2. Ann
        Arbor: Open Humanities Press.                        
      Coole, Diana and Frost, Samantha (eds) (2010) New Materialisms: Ontology,
        Agency and Politics. Durham: Duke University Press.  
      Cooper, Melinda (2008) Life as Surplus: Biotechnology and Capitalism in the
        Neoliberal Era. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
      Creed, Barbara (1993) The Monstrous-Feminine: Film, Feminism,
        Psychoanalysis. London: Routledge.                   
      Creed, Barbara (2009) Darwin’s Screens: Evolutionary Aesthetics, Time and
        Sexual Display in the Cinema. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
      Crist, Eileen (2013) On the poverty of our nomenclature. Environmental
        Humanities 3: 129–147.                               
      Critchley, Simon (2014) The Faith of the Faithless. London: Verso Books.
      Crutzen, Paul J and Stoermer, Eugene F (2000) The Anthropocene. Global
        Change Newsletter 41: 17–18.                         
      De Fontenay, Elizabeth (1998) Le silence des beˆtes. Paris: Fayard.
      De Graef, Ortwin (2016) Muscular humanities. Presentation at the European
        Consortium of Humanities Institutes and Centres (ECHIC) Annual
        Conference, Macerata, 21–22 April.                   
      Deleuze,Gilles(1988)Spinoza:PracticalPhilosophy.SanFrancisco:CityLights
        Books.                                               
      Deleuze, Gilles (1990) Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza. New York: Zone
        Books.                                               
      Deleuze, Gilles (2003) Pure Immanence. Essays on a Life. New York: Zone
        Books.                                               
      Deleuze,GillesandGuattari,Felix(1987)AThousandPlateaus:Capitalismand
        Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
      Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (1994) What is Philosophy? New York:
        Columbia University Press.                           

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    57      
                                                             
        Dolphijn,RickandVanderTuin,Iris(eds)(2012)NewMaterialism:Interviews
         and Cartographies. Ann Arbor: Open Humanities Press.
        Epstein, Mikhail (2012) The Transformative Humanities: A Manifesto. London:
         Bloomsbury.                                         
        Esposito, Roberto (2008) Bios: Biopolitics and Philosophy. Minneapolis:
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
        Fanon, Frantz (1967) Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Press.
        Ferrando, Francesca (2013) From the eternal recurrence to the posthuman
         multiverse. The Agonist 4(1–2): 1–11.               
        Foucault, Michel (1970) The Order of Things: An Archaeology of Human
         Sciences. New York: Pantheon Books.                 
        Fraser, Mariam, Kember, Sarah and Lury, Celia (eds) (2006) Inventive Life.
         Approaches to the New Vitalism. London: SAGE Publications.
        Fukuyama, Francis (2002) Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the
         Biotechnological Revolution. London: Profile Books. 
        Fuller, Matthew (2005) Media Ecologies: Materialist Energies in Art and
         Technoculture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.            
        Fuller, Matthew (2008) Software Studies. A Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.                                              
        Fuller,MatthewandGoffrey,Andrew(2013)EvilMedia.Cambridge,MA:MIT
         Press.                                              
        Galison, Peter (1997) Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics.
         Chicago: Chicago University Press.                  
        Gatens, Moira and Lloyd, Genevieve (1999) Collective Imaginings. New York:
         Routledge.                                          
        Giffney,NoreenandHird,MyraJ(2008)QueeringtheNon/Human.NewYork:
         Routledge.                                          
        Gilroy, Paul (2016) The Black Atlantic and the Re-enchantment of Humanism.
         Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.           
        Glotfelty, Cheryll and Fromm, Harold (eds) (1996) The Ecocriticism Reader.
         Athens: University of Georgia Press.                
        Goodley, Dan, Lawthorn, Rebecca and Rusmwick, Katherine (2014)
         Posthuman disability studies. Subjectivity 7(4): 341–361.
        Grosz, Elizabeth (1995) Space, Time and Perversion: Essays on the Politics of
         Bodies. New York: Routledge.                        
        Grosz, Elizabeth (2011) Becoming Undone: Darwinian Reflections on Life,
         Politics, and Art. Durham: Duke University Press.   
        Gruen, Lori and Weil, Kari (2012) Animal others: Editors’ introduction.
         Hypatia 27(3): 477–487.                             
        Grusin, Richard (2017) Anthropocene Feminism. Minneapolis: University of
         Minnesota Press.                                    
        Guattari, Felix (1995) Chaosmosis. An Ethico-aesthetic Paradigm. Sydney:
         Power Publications.                                 
        Guattari, Felix (2000) The Three Ecologies. London: The Athlone Press.
        Habermas,Ju¨rgen(2003)TheFutureofHumanNature.Cambridge:PolityPress.
        Halberstam, Jack (2012) Gaga Feminism. Boston: Beacon Press.
        Halberstam, Jack and Livingston, Ira (eds) (1995) Posthuman Bodies.
         Bloomington: Indiana University Press.              

[PAGE 28]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      58                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      Haraway, Donna (1985) A manifesto for cyborgs: Science, technology, and
        socialist feminism in the 1980s. Socialist Review 5(2): 65–107.
      Haraway,Donna(1988)Situatedknowledges:Thesciencequestioninfeminism
        as a site of discourse on the privilege of partial perspective. Feminist Studies
        14(3): 575–599.                                      
      Haraway, Donna (1990) Simians, Cyborgs and Women. London: Free
        Association Press.                                   
      Haraway,  Donna  (1997)  Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.
        FemaleMan(cid:2)_Meets_OncomouseTM. London: Routledge.
      Haraway, Donna (2003) The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People and
        Significant Otherness. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press.
      Haraway, Donna (2004 [1992]) The promises of monsters: A regenerative pol-
        itics for inappropriate/d others. In: The Haraway Reader. New York:
        Routledge.                                           
      Haraway, Donna (2015) Anthroposcene, Capitaloscene, Plantationoscene,
        Cthuluscene: Making kin. Environmental Humanities 6: 159–165.
      Harding, Sandra (1986) The Science Question in Feminism. Ithaca: Cornell
        University Press.                                    
      Harding, Sandra (1991) Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Ithaca: Cornell
        University Press.                                    
      Hardt, Michael and Negri, Antonio (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.                                    
      Hayles, N Katherine (1999) How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
        Cybernetics,Literatureand Informatics. Chicago:Universityof Chicago Press.
      Hayles, N Kathrine (2005) My Mother Was a Computer: Digital Subjects and
        Literary Texts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
      Hayward, Eva (2008) More lessons from a starfish: Prefixial flesh and trans-
        speciated selves. WSQ: Women’s Studies Quarterly 36(3–4): 64–85.
      Hayward, Eva (2011) Sensational jellyfish: Aquarium affects and the matter of
        immersion. Differences 25(5): 161–196.               
      Herbrechter, Stefan (2013) Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis. London:
        Bloomsbury.                                          
      Hird, Myra J and Roberts, Celia (2011) Feminism theorizes the nonhuman.
        Feminist Theory 12(2): 109–117.                      
      Holland, Eugene (2011) Nomad Citizenship. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     
      Ho¨rl, Erich (2013) A thousand ecologies: The process of cyberneticization and
        general ecology. In: Diederichsen, Diedrich and Franke, Anselm (eds)
        The Whole Earth: California and the Disappearance of the Outside. Berlin:
        Sternberg Press.                                     
      Irigaray, Luce (1993) An Ethics of Sexual Difference. Ithaca: Cornell
        University Press.                                    
      King, Katie (2011) Networked Reenactments: Stories Transdisciplinary
        Knowledges Tell. Durham: Duke University Press.      
      Kirby, Vicki (2011) Quantum Anthropologies: Life at Large. Durham: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Klein, Naomi (2014) This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate.
        New York: Simon and Schuster.                        

[PAGE 29]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    59      
                                                             
        Kristeva,Julia(1980)DesireinLanguage:ASemioticApproachtoLiteratureand
         Art. New York: Columbia University Press.           
        Kroker, Arthur (2014) Exits to the Posthuman Future. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Livingston, Julie and Puar,Jasbir K (eds) (2011) Interspecies. Social Text 29(1)
         [Special Issue].                                    
        Lloyd, Genevieve (1994) Part of Nature: Self-knowledge in Spinoza’s Ethic.
         Ithaca: Cornell University Press.                   
        Lloyd, Genevieve (1996) Spinoza and the Ethics. London: Routledge.
        Lovelock, James (2009) The Vanishing Face of Gaia: A Final Warning.
         New York: Basic Books.                              
        Lury, Celia, Parisi, Luciana and Terranova, Tiziana (eds) (2012) Topologies of
         culture. Theory, Culture & Society 29(4–5) [Special Issue].
        Lykke,Nina(2011)Thisdiscipline whichisnotone:Feministstudiesasapost-
         discipline. In: Lykke, Nina, Buikema, Rosemarie and Griffin, Gabriele (eds)
         Theories and Methodologies in Postgraduate Feminist Research: Researching
         Differently. New York: Routledge, 137–151.          
        Lyotard, Jean-Franc¸ois (1989) The Inhuman: Reflections on Time. Oxford:
         Blackwell.                                          
        MacCormack, Patricia (2012) Posthuman Ethics. London: Ashgate.
        MacCormack, Patricia (2014) The Animal Catalyst. London: Bloomsbury.
        Macfarlane, Robert (2016) Generation Anthropocene: How humans have
         altered the planet forever. The Guardian, 1 April. Available at: https://
         www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/01/generation-anthropocene-altered-
         planet-for-ever (accessed 21 June 2016).            
        MacKenzie, Adrian (2002) Transductions: Bodies and Machines at Speed.
         New York: Continuum.                                
        MacKinnon,CatherineA(2007)AreWomenHuman?Cambridge,MA:Harvard
         University Press.                                   
        Margulis, Lynn and Sagan, Dorion (1995) What Is Life? Berkley: University of
         California Press.                                   
        Massumi,Brian(1992)‘Anywhereyouwanttobe’:Anintroductiontofear.In:
         Broadhurst.Joan(ed.)DeleuzeandtheTranscendentalUnconscious.Warwick:
         Warwick Journal of Philosophy, pp. 175–215.         
        Massumi,Brian(1998)Sensingthevirtual,buildingtheinsensible.Architectural
         Design 68(5/6): 16–24.                              
        Massumi, Brian (2002) Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation.
         Durham: Duke University Press.                      
        Mbembe, Achille (2003) Necropolitics. Public Culture 15(1): 11–40.
        McNeil, Maureen (2007) Feminist Cultural Studies of Science and Technology.
         London: Routledge.                                  
        Midgley, Mary (1996) Utopias, Dolphins, and Computers: Problems of
         Philosophical Plumbing. London: Routledge.          
        Mignolo,Walter(2011)TheDarkerSideofWesternModernity:GlobalFutures,
         Decolonial Options. Durham: Duke University Press.  
        Moulier Boutang, Yann (2012) Cognitive Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Nakamura,Lisa(2002)Cybertypes:Race,EthnicityandIdentityontheInternet.
         London: Routledge.                                  
        Nayar, Pramod K (2013) Posthumanism. Cambridge: Polity.

[PAGE 30]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      60                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(6)
                                                             
      Nixon, Rob (2011) Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.             
      Nussbaum, Martha C (1999) Cultivating Humanity: a Classical Defense of
        Reform in Liberal Education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Papadopoulos,Dimitris(2010)Insurgentposthumanism.Ephemera10(2):134–151.
      Parikka, Jussi (2015a) A Geology of Media. Minneapolis: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     
      Parikka,Jussi(2015b)TheAnthrobscene.Minneapolis:UniversityofMinnesota
        Press.                                               
      Parisi, Luciana (2004) Abstract Sex: Philosophy, Bio-Technology, and the
        Mutation of Desire. London: Continuum.               
      Parisi, Luciana (2013) Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and
        Space. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                     
      Pepperell, Robert (2003) The posthuman manifesto. Intellect Quarterly.
        Available at: www.intellectbooks.co.uk/File:download,id¼412/Pepperell2.
        PDF (accessed 26 May 2016).                          
      Ponzanesi, Sandra, and Leurs, Koen (2014) Introduction to the Special Issue:
        On digital crossings in Europe. Crossings: Journal of Migration and Culture
        4(1): 3–22.                                          
      Pope Francis (2015) Encyclical Letter: Laudato si: On Care for Our Common
        Home. Rome: The Vatican Press.                       
      Protevi, John (2013) Life, War, Earth. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
        Press.                                               
      Rabinow, Paul (2003) Anthropos Today. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Raffnsoe, Sverre (2013) The Human Turn: The Makings of a Contemporary
        Relational Topography. Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School.
      Rich, Adrienne (1987) Blood, Bread and Poetry. London: Virago Press.
      Roden, David (2014) Posthuman Life: Philosophy at the Edge of the Human.
        London: Routledge.                                   
      Rose, Hilary, and Rose, Steven (2000) Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments against
        Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Harmony.          
      Rose,Nicholas(2007)ThePoliticsofLifeItself.Princeton:PrincetonUniversity
        Press.                                               
      Rosendhal Thomsen, Mad (2013) The New Human in Literature: Posthuman
        Visions of Change in Body, Mind and Society after 1900. London:
        Bloomsbury Academic.                                 
      Said, Edward (1978) Orientalism. New York: Pantheon Books.
      Sassen, Saskia (2014) Expulsions – Brutality and Complexity in the Global
        Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.    
      Schreibman, Susan, Siemens, Ray and Unsworth, John (2004) A Companion to
        Digital Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell.               
      Shildrick, Margrit (2009) Discourses of Disability, Subjectivity and Sexuality.
        London: Palgrave Macmillan.                          
      Shiva, Vandana (1993) Monocultures of the Mind. London: Palgrave.
      Shiva,Vandana(1997)Biopiracy:ThePlunderofNatureandKnowledge.Boston:
        South End Press.                                     
      Sloterdijk, Peter (2009) Rules for the human zoo: A response to the ‘Letter on
        Humanism’. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 27: 12–28.

[PAGE 31]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Braidotti                                    61      
                                                             
        Smelik, Anneke and Lykke, Nina (eds) (2008) Bits of Life: Feminism at the
         Intersections of Media, Bioscience, and Technology. Seattle: University of
         Washington Press.                                   
        Sobchack, Vivian (2004) Carnal Thoughts. Berkeley: University of California
         Press.                                              
        Spivak, Gayatri C (1990) Criticism, feminism and the institution. In: The
         Postcolonial Critic. New York: Routledge.           
        Stengers, Isabelle (1997) Power and Invention: Situating Science. Minneapolis:
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
        Sterling,Bruce(2014)Themanifestoofspeculativeposthumanism.Availableat:
         http://www.wired.com/2014/02/manifesto-speculative-posthumanism/
         (accessed 6 April 2018).                            
        Stimpson, Catherine R (2016) The nomadic humanities. Los Angeles Review of
         Books, 12 July.                                     
        Toscano, Alberto (2005) Axiomatic: The Deleuze Dictionary, ed. Parr, Adrian.
         Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 17–18.   
        Tsing,Anna(2015)TheMushroomattheEndoftheWorld:OnthePossibilityof
         Life in Capitalist Ruins. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
        VanDooren,Thom(2014)FlightWays:LifeandLossattheEdgeofExtinction.
         New York: Columbia University Press.                
        Wennemann, Daryl J (2013) Posthuman Personhood. Lanham: University Press
         of America.                                         
        Wolfe,Cary(ed.)(2003)Zoontologies.TheQuestionoftheAnimal.Minneapolis:
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
        Wolfe, Cary (2010) What Is Posthumanism? Minneapolis: University of
         Minnesota Press.                                    
        Rosi Braidotti is Distinguished University Professor and founding
        Director of the Centre for the Humanities at Utrecht University. Her
        publications include: Patterns of Dissonance (1991); Metamorphoses
        (2002); Transpositions (2006); La philosophie, la´ oo` on ne l’attend pas
        (2009); Nomadic Subjects (2001 [1994]; Nomadic Theory (2011b); The
        Posthuman (2013). She recently co-edited Conflicting Humanities (2016)
        with Paul Gilroy and The Posthuman Glossary (2018) with Maria
        Hlavajova. See also: www.rosibraidotti.com.          
        This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on
        ‘TransversalPosthumanities’,editedbyMatthewFullerandRosiBraidotti.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             