[PAGE 1]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 197                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    Posthuman,      All Too   Human                               
                                                                                  
                    Towards a New  Process Ontology                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    Rosi Braidotti                                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    Cyborgs, Companion Species and Nomadic Subjects               
                   I                                                              
                      READ DONNA Haraway’s work as Continental philosophy, notably the
                      French tradition of bodily materialism that argues, with Georges
                      Canguilhem, that any theory of subjectivity worthy of its name must take
                    into account the embodied and organic structure of the subject. Contrary to
                    Bruno Latour, Haraway perpetuates a tradition of thought which emphasizes
                    the importance of the subject in terms of both ethical and political account-
                    ability. In this regard, she contributes to critical theory as a discipline of
                    thought as well as to the social criticism of science. I also consider
                    Haraway’s thought as my travel companion across multiple nomadic paths
                    of reflection and practice. Her texts constitute a pioneering effort to set up
                    a connection between the culture of contemporary biotechnological sciences
                    and that of the human and social sciences. This project is complicated by
                    the fact that, in the historical era of advanced postmodernity, the very notion
                    of ‘the human’ is not only de-stabilized by technologically mediated social
                    relations in a globally connected world, but it is also thrown open to contra-
                    dictory redefinitions of what exactly counts as human. Haraway, not unlike
                    Deleuze and Guattari (1972, 1980), takes into consideration also the non-
                    human actors in a geopolitical, but also in an eco-philosophical manner.
                       I would consequently classify Haraway’s work as ‘high post-humanism’
                    and immediately qualify that statement by pointing out a twofold dimension
                    within this complex category: the first concerns the philosophical post-
                    humanism that is the trademark of the post-structuralist generation; the
                    second is a more targeted form of post-anthropocentrism that is not as wide-
                    spread. Haraway is very cautious about the term ‘post-human’, as the inter-
                    view in the present issue clearly shows. She gives priority instead to the
                    accountability for historical aspects of European culture, like colonialism
                    ■Theory, Culture & Society2006 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi),
                     Vol. 23(7–8): 197–208                                        
                     DOI: 10.1177/0263276406069232                                
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 2]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 198                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  198 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                  and fascism, which are in open contradiction with Europe’s stated beliefs
                  in humanist ideals and principles. Donna Haraway sums up admirably this
                  mixture of affects:                                             
                                                                                  
                     Shaped as an insider and an outsider to the hegemonic power and discourses
                     of my European and North American legacies, I remember that anti-Semitism
                     and misogyny intensified in the Renaissance and the Scientific Revolution of
                     early modern Europe, that racism and colonialism flourished in the travel-
                     ling habits of the cosmopolitan Enlightenment and that the intensified misery
                     of billions of men and women seems organically rooted in the freedoms of
                     transnational capitalism and technoscience. But I also remember the dreams
                     and achievements of contingent freedoms, situated knowledges and relief of
                     suffering that are inextricable from this contaminated triple historical
                     heritage. I remain a child of the Scientific Revolution, the Enlightenment and
                     technoscience. (1997: 3)                                     
                     I see Haraway as pursuing in a feminist way the line about bodily
                  materiality, though she speaks the language of science and technology rather
                  than that of post-metaphysical philosophy. She is an utterly non-nostalgic
                  post-human thinker: her conceptual universe is the high-technology world
                  of informatics and telecommunications. In this respect, she is conceptually
                  part of the same epistemological tradition as Bachelard, for whom the scien-
                  tific ratiois not necessarily hostile to the humanistic approaches and values.
                  Moreover, in this line of thinking the practice of science is not seen as
                  narrowly rationalistic, but rather allows for a broadened definition of the
                  term, to include the play of the unconscious, dreams and the imagination
                  in the production of scientific discourse. Following Foucault (1975),
                  Haraway draws our attention to the construction and manipulation of docile,
                  knowable bodies in our present social system. She invites us to think of what
                  new kinds of bodies are being constructed right now; that is, what kind of
                  gender-system is being constructed under our very noses.        
                     Thefeministpost-anthropocentricapproach,however,alsochallenges
                  the androcentrism of the post-structuralists’ corporeal materialism. Thus,
                  while sharing a great deal of Foucault’s premises about the modern regime
                  of truth as ‘bio-power’, Haraway also questions his redefinition of power.
                  Haraway notes that contemporary power does not work by normalized
                  heterogeneity any more, but rather by networking, communication 
                  redesigns and multiple interconnections. She concludes that Foucault
                  ‘names a form of power at its moment of implosion. The discourse of bio-
                  politics gives way to techno-babble’ (Haraway, 1991: 245, footnote 4). Two
                  points are noteworthy here: first, that Haraway analyses the contemporary
                  scientific revolution in more radical terms than Foucault does, mostly
                  because she bases it on first-hand knowledge about today’s technology.
                  Haraway’straininginbiologyandsociologyofscienceareveryusefulhere.
                  By comparison with her approach, Foucault’s analysis of the disciplining
                  of bodies appears already out of date, apart from being, of course, intrin-
                  sically androcentric.                                           
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 3]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 199                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                      Braidotti – Post-human, All Too Human 199   
                       Haraway raises a point that Deleuze (1986) also noted in his analysis
                    of Foucault, namely that the Foucauldian diagrams of power describe what
                    we have already ceased to be; like all cartography, they act a posteriori and
                    therefore fail to account for the situation here and now. Whereas Foucault’s
                    analysis rests on an early 20th-century view of the production system,
                    Haraway inscribes her analysis of the condition of women into an up-to-date
                    analysis of the post-industrial system of production. Arguing that white
                    capitalist patriarchy has turned into the ‘informatics of domination’
                    (Haraway, 1991: 162), Haraway suggests that women have been cannibal-
                    ized by the new technologies and have disappeared from the field of visible
                    social agents. The post-industrial system makes it urgent to invent a new
                    politics on the basis of a more adequate understanding of how the contem-
                    porary subject functions.                                     
                       Haraway’s cyborg inserts an oppositional consciousness at the heart of
                    the debate on the new technological societies currently being shaped, in
                    such a way as to highlight issues of gender and sexual difference within a
                    much broader discussion about survival and social justice. More than ever,
                    therefore, the question of power relations and of ethical and political resist-
                    ance emerges as relevant in the age of informatics of domination.
                       This philosophical post-humanism does not, therefore, result in anti-
                    foundationalism. It rather stresses the need for process ontology. Thinking
                    is a nomadic activity, which takes place in the transitions between poten-
                    tially contradictory positions. It is not topologically bound, especially in the
                    age of the global economy and telematic networks, but this does not make
                    it ungrounded, like a view from nowhere. To be in process or transition does
                    not place the thinking subject outside history or time: postmodernity as a
                    specific moment of our historicity is a major location that needs to be
                    accounted for. A location is an embedded and embodied memory: it is a set
                    of counter-memories, which are activated by the resisting thinker against
                    the grain of the dominant representations of subjectivity. A location is a
                    materialist temporal and spatial site of co-production of the subject, and
                    thus anything but an instance of relativism. The politics of location, or
                    situated knowledges, rests on process ontology to posit the primacy of
                    relations over substances.                                    
                       Donna Haraway’s work dislocates the centrality of the human, in favor
                    of the in/non/post-human and of bio-centered egalitarianism. Thus, in her
                    criticism of the exploitative logic of Western techno-sciences from within,
                    Haraway (1997) stresses a number of crucial features. The first is power as
                    a dynamic web of interconnections or hybrid contaminations, as a principle
                    of radical non-purity. The second is the refusal to fall into the pitfall of the
                    classical nature/culture divide: there is no natural telosor order, as distinct
                    from technological mediation. In order to restructure our collective relation-
                    ship to the new nature/culture compound of contemporary techno-sciences,
                    Haraway calls for a renewed kinship system, radicalized by concretely
                    affectionate ties to the non-human ‘others’. Haraway (1992) argues that the
                    subject-object, nature-culture divides are linked to patriarchal, oedipal
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 4]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 200                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  200 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                  familial narratives. Against them, she mobilizes an enlarged sense of
                  community, based on empathy, accountability and recognition (Haraway,
                  1997). Moreover, she extends these prerogatives to non-human agents or
                  subjects, such as animals, plants, cells, bacteria and the Earth as a whole.
                                                                                  
                  Nomadic Subjects of the Chaos/Cosmos Unite!                     
                  Both Deleuze and Haraway refuse to underplay the contradictions and
                  discontinuities between the human and the non-human environment. They
                  also refuse to romanticize the interaction between them. This sentimental
                  glorification of the humans’ proximity with animals is especially problem-
                  atic in contemporary culture, due as much to the social climate of resurgent
                  socio-biological determinism as to the culture of pets. Deleuze’s concept
                  of the becoming-animal is a radical conceptual version of anti- 
                  anthropocentrism (Deleuze and Guattari, 1980). There is no metaphorical
                  dimension in Deleuze’s notion of the becoming-animal – nor is there the
                  aporetic loop of deconstructive thinking, which, in Derrida (2002) for
                  instance, reduces animality to a general figuration of Alterity. Contrary to
                  what Haraway herself states in the interview in this issue, I do not find
                  much resonance between Derrida’s linguistically mediated scheme of
                  deconstruction and Haraway’s empowering figurations. Nor do I see much
                  in common between Haraway’s robust re-grounding of praxis in bio-semiotic
                  affinity and Derrida’s celebration of undecidability. As in the case of Wolfe’s
                  (2003) work, this approach perpetuates the metaphorical use of animal
                  imagery in a representational mode which is far less convincing than
                  Haraway’s (1997) trans-species egalitarianism and social bonding. I find a
                  far deeper alliance between her companion species and the philosophy of
                  multiple becoming that lies at the heart of my nomadic subject, which is
                  simultaneously materialist, therefore not textual, and neo-literal, that is to
                  say resolutely not metaphorical. Haraway shares with Deleuze two key
                  features: serious neo-foundational materialism on the one hand and a
                  rigorous theory of relationality on the other.                  
                     As a hybrid, or body-machine, the cyborg, or the companion species,
                  is a connection-making entity; a figure of interrelationality, receptivity and
                  global communication that deliberately blurs categorical distinctions
                  (human/machine; nature/culture; male/female; oedipal/non-oedipal). It
                  allows Haraway to think specificity without falling into relativism in the
                  quest for adequate representation of a generic post-naturalistic humanity.
                  Crucial to this operation is the rejection of a semiotic method of approach.
                  In my reading, the function of figurations such as the cyborg or the com-
                  panion species is not abstract but, rather, political. It suggests how we
                  should go about re-thinking about the unity of the human being. We need
                  new forms of literacy to decode today’s world. Figurations also entail a
                  discursive ethics: that one cannot know properly, or even begin to under-
                  stand, that towards which one has no affinity. Critical intelligence, for
                  Haraway, is a form of sympathy. One should never criticize that which one
                  isnotcomplicitouswith:criticismmustbeconjugatedinanon-reactivemode,
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 5]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 201                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                      Braidotti – Post-human, All Too Human 201   
                    a creative gesture, so as to avoid the oedipal plot of phallo-logocentric
                    theory.                                                       
                       In nomadic thought, a radically immanent intensive body is an assem-
                    blage of forces, or flows, intensities and passions that solidify in space, and
                    consolidate in time, within the singular configuration commonly known as
                    an ‘individual’ self. This intensive and dynamic entity does not coincide
                    with the enumeration of inner rationalist laws, nor is it merely the unfold-
                    ing of genetic data and information. It is rather a portion of forces that is
                    stable enough to sustain and to undergo constant, though non-destructive,
                    fluxes of transformation.                                     
                    Anti-Oedipus                                                  
                                                                                  
                    Thereisadeepanti-OedipalsensibilityatworkinHaraway,asinDeleuze,
                    though in her case, and by her own admission, it comes close to resist-
                    ance against psychoanalysis (Penley and Ross, 1991). I agree with
                    Haraway that the imaginary surrounding psychoanalytic definitions of the
                    unconscious is deeply conservative, family-bound and heterosexist. But
                    then,speakingasacartographer,Ithinkthisisaperfectlyadequatereflec-
                    tionofourcultureanditsdominantnorms,soIwouldneverblamepsycho- 
                    analysis for bringing the bad news that we live under a phallogocentric
                    regime. I will quarrel with psychoanalysis, however, when it argues for the
                    historical necessity and immutability of the phallogocentric regime. In
                    opposition to this political conservatism, I choose the transformative
                    politics which feminism best exemplifies, and philosophical nomadism
                    helps to theorize. Thus, Haraway’s feminist cyborg project aims at dislodg-
                    ing the Oedipal narratives from their culturally hegemonic positions and
                    thus diminishing their power over the construction of identity. Firmly
                    located inside the belly of the beast of contemporary techno-culture and
                    its mutant or hybrid social imaginary, Haraway wants to fight back by
                    positing affirmative and empowering figurations for the new interaction
                    with animals, mutants and machines, which is constitutive of our histori-
                    cal era.                                                      
                       The strength of Haraway’s project is its inspirational force: she wants
                    to invent a new discourse for the unconscious, one that can reflect the
                    conditions of our historicity. The counter-figurations for this non-
                    oedipalized unconscious trace a sort of becoming-animal: the cyborg, the
                    coyote, the trickster and the oncomouse produce alternative structures of
                    otherness. Just like Deleuze, Haraway has little patience for the linguistic
                    paradigm within which the unconscious has been conceptualized, with its
                    intrinsic binaries, the equation of desire with lack and the laws of displace-
                    ment, condensation and exclusion. Haraway, not unlike my nomadic
                    subject, prefers instead multiplicities and multiply displaced identities.
                    Non-linearity, non-fixity and non-unitary subjectivity are the priority, and
                    they are situated in close proximity to woman, the native, the dispossessed,
                    the abused, the excluded, the ‘other’ of the high-tech clean and efficient
                    bodies that contemporary culture sponsors. This is comparable to Deleuze’s
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 6]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 202                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  202 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                  attempts to rethink the becoming-animal as a figuration for the humanoid
                  hybrids we are becoming.                                        
                     Donna Haraway proposes to start rethinking this historical condition
                  in a more pragmatic and positive manner from the figuration of oncomouse
                  as the first patented animal in the world, a transgenic organism created for
                  the purposes of research. The oncomouse is the techno-body par excellence:
                  it has been created for the purpose of profit-making trafficking between the
                  laboratories and the market place, and thus navigates between patenting
                  offices and the research benches. Haraway wants to establish and empha-
                  size a sense of kinship and connection with this transgenic animal. Calling
                  her ‘my sibling ... male or female, s/he is my sister’ (1997: 79), Haraway
                  stresses also the extent to which oncomouse is both a victim and a scape-
                  goat, a Christ-like figure that sacrifices herself in order to find the cure for
                  breast cancer and thus save the lives of many women: a mammal rescuing
                  other mammals. Because the oncomouse breaks the purity of lineage, she
                  is also a spectral figure: the never-dead that pollutes the natural order
                  simply by being manufactured and not born. S/he is, in my terms, a cyber-
                  teratological apparatus that scrambles the established codes and thus
                  destabilizes the subject: a nomadic device.                     
                     This implicated or non-innocent way to approach the oncomouse is
                  symptomatic of Haraway’s project, which contains a cognitive, as well as an
                  ethical angle. It is about thinking across established categories, such as
                  nature/culture, born/man-made, but also about criticizing commodity
                  fetishism and the so-called market economy in its corporate and global
                  phase. The ethical part of the project concerns the creation of a new kinship
                  system: a new social nexus and new forms of social connection with these
                  techno-others. What kinds of bonds can be established and how can they
                  be sustained?                                                   
                     In her recent work on ‘companion species’ (2003), Donna Haraway
                  draws a direct line between the early figurations of the cyborg and of onco-
                  mouse on the one hand, and companion species like dogs on the other.
                  They mark the shifting boundaries of very affective and dynamic kinship
                  relations. For Haraway, these relations need to be redefined in the context
                  of a techno-scientific world that has replaced the traditional natural order
                  with a nature–culture compound. An epistemological question therefore
                  generates a new ethical dimension. Accordingly, the human–animal
                  relationneedsbeliftedoutoftheOedipalandinfantilizingnarrativewithin
                  which it has historically been confined. As a nature–culture compound, a
                  dog – not unlike other products of techno-science – is a radical other,
                  albeit a significant other. We need to devise a symbolic kinship system
                  thatmatchesthiscomplexity.Thisisnotareferencetotheliterarybestiary
                  as an established genre, with its own grammar and a metaphorical refer-
                  ence to animals like letters in an alternative alphabet (Braidotti, 2002).
                  Somethinglesssophisticatedandmorematerialisoccurringinthecontem-
                  porary, processes of becoming-animal, which have nothing to do with
                  metaphors of animality.                                         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 7]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 203                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                      Braidotti – Post-human, All Too Human 203   
                       It is at this level that a sort of dissymmetry occurs between Haraway
                    and Deleuze: both acknowledge that the strength of animals rests on the fact
                    that they are immanent to their territories and environmentally bound, but
                    they negotiate their next move differently. Donna Haraway moves a step
                    beyond the Oedipal configuration of the culture of familiar pets by propos-
                    ing a new kinship system that includes ‘companion species’ alongside other
                    siblings and relatives. In Deleuze’s philosophical nomadism, on the other
                    hand, this proximity is returned to the territorial materialist foundations from
                    whence it came. Zoe, or the generative force of non-human life, rules through
                    a trans-species and transgenic interconnection, or rather a chain of connec-
                    tions, which can best be described as an ecological philosophy of non-
                    unitary, embodied subjects and of multiple belongings. It is indeed the case,
                    as Haraway suggests in her interview, that at times Deleuze’s texts on the
                    becoming-woman/animal can be problematic, if not downright disappointing.
                    I have commented extensively on this in my own work. I happen to believe,
                    however, that this is not a tragedy. Deleuze is truly anti-oedipal also and
                    especially in the delicate issue of the reception of his own work. There are
                    no Deleuzeans, as Costantin Boundas (Boundas and Olkowski, 1994) rightly
                    put it; there are only people who engage with Deleuze’s thought, figurations
                    and intellectual intensities – in order to construct alternative ways of
                    thinking. If the aim of critical theory is to create new concepts, then the
                    question is whether nomadism can be an inspiring and empowering force or
                    not. In other words: for us nomadic subjects there is no faithful allegiance to
                    his master’s voice, but only joyful acts of disobedience and gentle but resolute
                    betrayal. I happen to think that this is also the best way to read Haraway’s
                    own texts and that all imitators, or repetitors, are doomed from the start.
                    The Positivity of Monsters                                    
                    Haraway’s cyborgs, companion species and other figurations, read alongside
                    Deleuze’s rhizomes, suggest that it is crucial to invent conceptual schemes
                    that allow us to think the unity and the interdependence of the human, the
                    bodily and its historical ‘others’ at the very point in time when these others
                    return to dislocate the foundations of the humanistic worldview.
                       One needs to turn to ‘minor’, not to say marginal and hybrid genres,
                    such as science fiction, science fiction horror and cyber punk, to find fitting
                    cultural illustrations of the changes and transformations that are taking
                    place in the forms of relations available in our post-human present. Low
                    cultural genres, like science fiction, are mercifully free of grandiose preten-
                    sions – of the aesthetic or cognitive kind – and thus end up being a more
                    accurate and honest depiction of contemporary culture than other, more self-
                    consciously ‘representational’ genres. The quest for positive social and
                    cultural representations of hybrid, monstrous, abject and alien others in
                    such a way as to subvert the construction and consumption of pejorative
                    differences, makes the science fiction genre an ideal breeding ground to
                    explore our relation to what Haraway (1992) describes affectionately as ‘the
                    promises of monsters’.                                        
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 8]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 204                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  204 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                     Haraway’s distinctive and idiosyncratic writing style expresses the
                  force of the de-centering that she is operating at the conceptual level, forcing
                  the readers to re-adjust, or perish. Nowhere is the empowering force more
                  visible than in Haraway’s treatments of animals, machines and the
                  monstrous, hybrid ‘others’. Deeply immersed in contemporary culture,
                  science fiction and cyber punk included, Haraway is fascinated by the
                  difference embodied by reconstructed, mutant or altered others. Her techno-
                  monsters contain enthralling promises of possible re-embodiments and
                  actualized differences. Multiple, heterogeneous, uncivilized, they show the
                  way to multiple virtual possibilities. The cyborg, the monster, the animal –
                  the classical ‘other than’ the human are thus emancipated from the category
                  of pejorative difference and shown forth in a more positive light. Haraway’s
                  intimate knowledge of technology is the tool that facilitates this qualitative
                  leap; in this respect, she is a true cyber-teratologist.        
                     The hyper-reality of the nomadic or cyborg post-human predicament
                  does not wipe out politics or the need for political resistance: it just makes
                  itmorenecessarythanevertoworktowardsaradicalredefinitionofpolitical
                  action. Moreover, post-human embodiment is written into the cash-nexus,
                  as Chela Sandoval (1999) also pointed out. Cyberspace is a highly contested
                  social space that exists parallel to increasingly complex social realities. The
                  clearest exemplification of the social powers of these technologies is the flow
                  of money through computer-governed stock exchanges that always work and
                  never sleep, the world over. This flow of pure data spells the decline of the
                  master-narratives of modernism, but, as Bukatman (1993) astutely observes,
                  it also constitutes a sort of master-narrative of its own, which spells the
                  decline of humanism and the dawn of the age of post-humanity.   
                     Moreover, capital harps on and trades in body fluids: the cheap sweat
                  and blood of the disposable workforce throughout the Third World; but also,
                  the wetness of desire of First World consumers as they commodify their
                  existence into over-saturated stupor. Hyper-reality does not wipe out class
                  relations: it just intensifies them. Postmodernity rests on the paradox of
                  simultaneous commodification and conformism of cultures, while intensify-
                  ing disparities among them, as well as structural inequalities. 
                     An important aspect of this situation is the omnipotence of the visual
                  media. Our era has turned visualization into the ultimate form of control.
                  This marks not only the final stage in the commodification of the scopic, but
                  also the triumph of vision over all the other senses. It is also something of
                  special concern from a feminist perspective, because it tends to reinstate a
                  hierarchy of bodily perception which overprivileges vision in relation to
                  other senses, especially touch and sound. The primacy of vision has been
                  challenged by feminist theories, which have inspiring things to say about
                  scopophilia, that is to say a vision-centred approach to thought, knowledge
                  and science. In a psychoanalytic perspective, this takes the form of a
                  critique of the phallogocentric bias that is built into vision. Thus Irigaray
                  (1974) links it to the pervasive powers of the masculine symbolic. Fox Keller
                  (1992) reads it instead as a rapacious drive towards cognitive penetration
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 9]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 205                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                      Braidotti – Post-human, All Too Human 205   
                    of the ‘secrets of nature’, which bears a direct link to the social and psychic
                    construction of masculinity. In a more socio-political framework, Haraway
                    (1991) attacks the priority which our culture gives to the logocentric hold
                    of disembodied vision, which is best exemplified by the satellite/eye in the
                    sky. She opposes to it an embodied and therefore accountable redefinition
                    of the act of seeing as a form of connection to the object of vision, which
                    she defines in terms of ‘passionate detachment’.              
                       There is consequently little time or space for nostalgia. Deleuze’s
                    hybrid nomadic selves; the multiple feminist-operated becoming-woman of
                    women; Irigaray’s woman as not-one; Haraway’s cyborgs, not unlike Cixous’s
                    new Medusa (1975), are often rendered in the old-fashioned social imagi-
                    nary as monstrous, hybrid, scary deviants. What if what was at fault here,
                    however, were the very social imaginary that can only register changes of
                    this magnitude on the panic-stricken moralistic register of deviancy? What
                    if these unprogrammed-for others were forms of subjectivity that have simply
                    shrugged off the shadow of binary logic and negativity and have moved on?
                    The process of transformation of the subject goes on and we need process
                    ontology to provide adequate accounts of it.                  
                    Neo-asceticism                                                
                    Affectivity plays a big role in both Haraway’s work and my nomadic subject:
                    both invent a new conceptual style that refuses to engage in negative criti-
                    cism for its own sake and acts instead from positive and empowering
                    relationships to texts, authors and ideas. The emphasis falls on a cognitive
                    brand of empathy, or intense affinity: it is the capacity for compassion, which
                    combines the power of understanding with the force to endure in sympathy
                    with a people, all of humanity, the planet and civilization as a whole. It is
                    an extra-personal and a trans-personal capacity, which should be driven
                    away from any universalism and grounded instead in the radical immanence
                    of a sense of belonging to and being accountable for a community, a people
                    and a territory.                                              
                       This ethical line of transversality produces a distinct ‘theoretical
                    style’. For instance, Deleuze’s style is compassionate, empathic yet also very
                    dry and rigorous. He does stress the positive or joyful aspects of a philoso-
                    pher’s work, stressing the effects of their thought, much as a painter would
                    comment on the quality of a landscape. There is something precise and
                    distant, uncompromising and unsentimental about it. It is indeed an imper-
                    sonal, ascetic style, as sharp as a cartographer’s gaze, but as involved as a
                    lover’s. The style is a philosopher’s conceptual persona, his metamorphic
                    body: that which s/he is destined to become. It acts as a form of resistance
                    against the pervasiveness of the doxa and also as a strategy in institutional
                    life. Social institutions tend to generate, instill and reward the reproduction
                    of negative passions forcing the oedipal subjugated participants to labor
                    under the twin logic of narcissism and paranoia. This ability to disconnect
                    from the paranoid-narcissistic-self-nexus, so as to activate a more affirma-
                    tive set of passions enacts simultaneously an act of withdrawal (a minus)
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 10]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 206                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  206 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                  and of addition (a plus). The subject subtracts him/herself from the reactive
                  affects by stepping out of the negativity circuit. By virtue of this s/he tran-
                  scends negativity, thereby generating and making room for more affirmative
                  forces. This ascetic practice produces both a vision of the self and a role
                  for the intellectual which consists not in leading the opinions (doxa), legis-
                  lating the truth (dogma) or administering the protocols of intellectual life,
                  but rather in creating and disseminating new concepts and ideas. It is not
                  a matter of representing others, or speaking on their behalf, but rather about
                  injecting doses of positivity into institutional and academic practice, so as
                  to turn it into an instrument of production of the new. The link between
                  reason and the imagination, theory and passion is crucial to this project.
                     Something analogous to this asceticism is at work in Donna Haraway’s
                  choice of the figuration of the ‘modest witness’ to describe the activity of
                  critical thinking. In keeping with her preference for situated and partial
                  forms of knowledge, Haraway (1997) offers the notion of modesty as a form
                  of accountability, open-ended dialogue and critical thinking that aims at
                  witnessing, not at judging. She specifies that not only is a feminist notion
                  of modesty not allergic to power, but also that it provides an enlarged defi-
                  nition of scientific objectivity as a local, partial and yet valuable achieve-
                  ment. ‘The approach I am trying to work for’, she states, ‘is rigorously
                  committed to testing and attesting. To engage in and understand that this is
                  always an interpretative, engaged, contingent, fallible engagement. It is
                  never a disengaged account’ (Haraway, 2000: 160). Self-consciously
                  ‘consumed by the project of materialized refiguration’ (1997: 23), Haraway
                  rethinks the position of the researcher and the critical thinker in terms of
                  empathy and affinity. The ‘modest witness’ is neither detached not uncaring,
                  but a border-crossing figure who attempts to recontextualize his/her own
                  practice within fast-changing social horizons. Accepting the techno-present
                  without falling victim to its brutality; yearning for knowledge and depth in
                  a fast-moving infotainment-consuming culture; aspiring to social justice ina
                  world of global inequalities – these are some of the ethical values embodied
                  in Haraway’s vision of the subject. Refusing hegemonic positions, while
                  accounting for clear disparities in access and means, is a way of reformu-
                  lating knowledge in a techno-scientific world. Modesty and a strong
                  imagination are the key virtues.                                
                     The prophetic dimension is alive and well in Donna Haraway’s work,
                  which demands epistemological and political respect for critical thought
                  where creativity would be unimaginable without some visionary or spiritual
                  fuel. This is post-secular thought at its best.                 
                     Prophetic, nomadic or visionary minds are thinkers of the future. The
                  future as an active object of desire propels us forth and we can draw from
                  it the strength and motivation to be active in the here and now of a present
                  that hangs on in between the ‘no longer’ and the ‘not yet’ of advanced post-
                  modernity. The present is always the future present: it will have made a
                  positive difference in the world. Only the yearning for sustainable futures
                  can construct a liveable present. The anticipation of endurance, of making
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 11]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 207                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                      Braidotti – Post-human, All Too Human 207   
                    it to a possible ‘tomorrow’, transposes energies from the future back into the
                    present. This is how sustainability enacts modes of creative becoming in a
                    non-entropic model of energy-flow, and hence of transferral of desire
                    (Braidotti, 2002, 2006). Drawing energy from the thinkability of the future
                    means that our desires are sustainable to the extent that they engender the
                    conditions of possibility for the future. In order to get there, a nomadic
                    subject position of flow and multi-layeredness is a major facilitator. This is
                    not a leap of faith, but an active transposition, a transformation at the in-
                    depth level, a change of culture akin to genetic mutations, but registered
                    also at the ethical level. In this project, cyborgs and nomadic subjects are
                    companion species that endure.                                
                    References                                                    
                    Boundas, Constantin and Dorothea Olkowski (eds) (1994) Gilles Deleuze and the
                    Theatre of Philosophy. New York and London: Routledge.        
                    Braidotti, Rosi (2002) Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming.
                    Cambridge, UK and Malden, MA: Polity Press/Blackwell.         
                    Braidotti, Rosi (2006) Transpositions: On Nomadic Ethics. Cambridge, UK and
                    Malden, MA: Polity Press/Blackwell.                           
                    Bukatman, Scott (1993) Terminal Identity: The Virtual Subject in Postmodern
                    Science Fiction. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.           
                    Cixous, Hélène (1975) ‘Le Rire de la Méduse’, L’Arc61.        
                    Deleuze, Gilles (1986) Foucault. Paris: Minuit. (English trans. by Sean Hand:
                    Foucault. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1988.)  
                    Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1972) L’Anti-Oedipe: capitalisme et schizo-
                    phrénie I. Paris: Minuit. (English translation by Robert Hurley, Mark Seem and
                    Helen R. Lane: Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. New York: Viking
                    Press/Richard Seaver, 1977.)                                  
                    Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari (1980) Mille plateaux: capitalisme et schizo-
                    phrénie II. Paris: Minuit. (English translation by Brian Massumi: A Thousand
                    Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
                    Press, 1987.)                                                 
                    Derrida, Jacques (2002) ‘The Animal that Therefore I Am’, Critical Inquiry 28(2):
                    369–417.                                                      
                    Foucault, Michel (1975) Surveiller et punir. Paris: Gallimard. (English translation:
                    Discipline and Punish. New York: Pantheon Books, 1977.)       
                    Fox Keller, Evelyn (1992) Secrets of Life, Secrets of Death: Essays on Language,
                    Gender and Science. New York and London: Routledge.           
                    Haraway, Donna (1991) Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature.
                    London: Free Association Books.                               
                    Haraway, Donna (1992) ‘The Promises of Monsters: A Regenerative Politics for
                    Inappropriate/d Others’, in Lawrence Grossberg, Cary Nelson and Paula A. Treich-
                    ler (eds) Cultural Studies. London and New York: Routledge.   
                    Haraway, Donna (1997) Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium. FemaleMan©_
                    Meets_OncomouseTM. London and New York: Routledge.            
                    Haraway, Donna (2000) How Like a Leaf: An Interview with Thyrza Nichols Goodeve.
                    New York and London: Routledge.                               
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

[PAGE 12]
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
           197-208 069232 Braidotti (D) 2/12/06 10:47 Page 208                    
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                  208 Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8)                           
                                                                                  
                  Haraway, Donna (2003) The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People and
                  Significant Otherness. Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press.         
                  Irigaray, Luce (1974) Spéculum: de l’autre femme. Paris: Minuit. (English transla-
                  tion by Gillian Gill: Speculum of the Other Woman. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
                  Press.)                                                         
                  Penley, Constance and Andrew Ross (eds) (1991) Technoculture. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesota Press.                                  
                  Sandoval, Chela (1999) ‘Women Prefer a Choice’, in Jenny Wolmark (ed.) Cyber-
                  sexualities. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.             
                  Wolfe, Cary (ed.) (2003) Zoontologies: The Question of the Animal. Minneapolis:
                  University of Minnesota Press.                                  
                  Rosi Braidotti is Distinguished Professor in the Humanities at Utrecht
                  University in the Netherlands. She has published extensively in feminist
                  philosophy, epistemology, poststructuralism and psychoanalysis. Her latest
                  books include Metamorphoses: Towards a Materialist Theory of Becoming
                  (Polity Press, 2002); Thinking Differently. A European Women’s Studies
                  Reader (co-edited with Gabriele Griffin; Zed Books, 2002); and Transposi-
                  tions: On Nomadic Ethics (Polity Press, 2006).                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  