[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Article                                              
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                             2018,Vol.35(1)91–115
        Israel-Palestine  and  the                           
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2017
                                             Reprintsandpermissions:
        Settler  Colonial  ‘Turn’:                           
                                        sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276416688544
        From   Interpretation              journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        to Decolonization                                    
        Rachel Busbridge                                     
        Freie Universita¨t Berlin                            
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        In recent years there has been a powerful resurgence of settler colonialism as an
        interpretive framework through which to understand the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
        Attached to the burgeoning field of settler colonial studies, this so-called ‘turn’ to
        settler colonialism has seen Israel-Palestine increasingly compared alongside New
        WorldwhitesettlersocietieslikeAustralia,CanadaandtheUnitedStates.Inseeking
        toundercutthelensofexceptionalismthroughwhichtheconflicthasconventionally
        been viewed, the settler colonial paradigm has some important counter-hegemonic
        implications for reframing Israel-Palestine, not least of which is its prescription for
        decolonization.However,itisparadoxicallyinthecontextofdecolonizationthatthe
        limits of the settler colonial paradigm become most apparent. I argue that these
        limitations areconnected to the dominance of Patrick Wolfe’s structural account of
        settler colonialism, which leaves very little room for transformation, and to the
        particular connotations settler colonial studies has acquired from the New World
        contexts in which it is most often articulated. This is particularly the case in Israel-
        Palestine, where these connotations precludeengagement with the national aspects
        oftheconflictandleaveunder-examinedtheuniqueresonancesofthesettler/native
        distinction, which need reckoning with in any serious account of decolonization.
        Keywords                                             
        colonialism, decolonization, Israel, Palestine       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Thereisyetnolanguageofdecolonisationpertainingtosettlercolo-
         nial contexts: when the focus is on decolonisation, settler colonial-
         ism remains off the radar; when settler colonialism as a specific
                                                             
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:RachelBusbridge.Email:r.busbridge@latrobe.edu.au
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      92                            Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
        colonial form is acknowledged, it is decolonisation that is excised
        from the interpretive picture. (Veracini, 2007)      
                                                             
      Recent years have witnessed the consolidation of settler colonial studies
      as its own field of scholarly inquiry. Centrally grounded on Patrick
      Wolfe’s (1999) highly influential account of settler colonialism, which
      leveragesfromthepremisethatinsettlersocieties‘invasionisastructure,
      not an event’, settler colonial studies conceives of settler colonialism as a
      ‘global and transnational phenomenon’ that is ‘as much a thing of the
      past as a thing of the present’ (Cavanagh and Veracini, 2013: 1).
      According to the framework, the key distinction between colonialism
      and settler colonialism is that the former is organized around a logic of
      exploitation while the latter is characterized by a logic of elimination.
      In contrast to the colonizer who seeks the labour of the colonized,
      the settler colonizer instead seeks their land, with the elimination of
      the native part and parcel of the settler’s attempt to replace them. The
      recent boom in settler colonial studies, including a proliferation of pub-
      lications and the establishment of a dedicated journal, has seen settler
      colonialism emerge as a key theoretical framework with which to
      engage contemporary colonial legacies, and has invited a variety of com-
      parative projects seeking to explore the dynamics of settler domination
      and indigenous subjugation in various contexts, most commonly
      Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand.  
        One of the most interesting developments in this academic trend is the
      currentgroundswellintheapplicationofthesettlercolonialparadigmto
      theconflict in Israel-Palestine. While settler colonialism is bynomeansa
      new modality of interpreting the conflict, having figured in Palestinian,
      anti-Zionist and Marxist analyses since at least the 1920s (see Pappe,
      2015), the recent ‘settler colonial turn’ (Collins, 2011) is characterized
      by a number of distinctive features, not least of which is the ways in
      which it brings Israel and its relationship to the Palestinians into direct
      comparative focus alongside New World white settler states. This turn,
      the article suggests, cannot be read outside of the growing internation-
      alization of the Palestinian cause, by which I mean the slow but steady
      overturning of the default sympathy traditionally granted to Israel in
      favourofanincreasingidentificationwiththePalestinians.Theburgeon-
      ing popularity of the settler colonial paradigm is both reflective of and
      instrumental in this shift, which has seen the Palestinian struggle gain an
      unprecedented legitimacy in progressive circles, especially in the West.
        This article argues that settler colonialism as an interpretive paradigm
      holds powerful conceptual and pedagogical implications for reframing
      understandings of the conflict in Israel-Palestine, which have been typic-
      ally fragmented and frequently mythologized in the international arena.
      Notonlydoesitprovideacoherentandlegibleframewithwhichtomake
      senseofIsraeli-Palestinianrelations,butitalsooffersafarmoreaccurate

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    93      
                                                             
        portrayal of the conflict than the picture of Palestinian criminality and
        Israeli victimhood that has conventionally been painted. Ilan Pappe
        (2012: 40–1) suggests that settler colonialism remains the most useful
        paradigmatic perspective on Israel-Palestine to date. I would add that
        it is also the most potentially productive because it suggests that conven-
        tional models of conflict resolution are ill equipped to deal with the
        conflict’s colonial dimensions, proposing instead that any ‘solution’ be
        framed by a project of decolonization.               
         Yet, it is precisely in its prescription for decolonization that the settler
        colonialmodel encountersitstheoreticalpartialities andnormative limita-
        tions in Israel-Palestine. This is due, I argue, to the dominance of Wolfe’s
        structural account of settler colonialism and the specific meanings the
        paradigm has come to acquire by virtue of the particular contexts in
        which it is typically articulated: New World white settler societies with
        small indigenous populations. On the one hand, Wolfe’s vision of settler
        colonialism is effectively zero-sum, leaving little room for transformation
        beyondopposition–acritiquethathasbeenmountedagainstsettlercolo-
        nial studies more generally (e.g. Rowse, 2014; Snelgrove et al., 2014;
        Svirsky,2014).Ontheotherhand,thedeepdistasteforsettlernationalism
        and commitment to preserve the settler/native binary in settler colonial
        studies–bothofwhichmakeagreatdealofsenseinNewWorldsettings–
        leave certain issues under-examined in the Israeli-Palestinian context.
        In particular, they gloss over the national dimensions of the conflict,
        which prompt difficult questions of Israeli rights to self-determination as
        asettlercollective,andhinderreflectiononthepoliticalimplicationsofthe
        settler/native distinction as applied to Israelis and Palestinians, which are
        not as straightforward as they may be in other locations. If the settler
        colonial paradigm is to deliver on its most counter-hegemonic promises
        in Israel-Palestine, I argue, scholars must be willing to engage issues that
        uncomfortably sit on the edge of its typical parameters.
         The article begins by mapping the re-emergence of the settler colonial
        paradigm. Section Two engages the transnational implications of the
        settler colonial turn, focusing on the ways in which the reframing of
        the conflict promotes sympathy for and solidarity with the Palestinian
        cause.SectionThreeexplorestheprescriptionfordecolonizationimplicit
        to the settler colonial paradigm, which is politically powerful in the con-
        text of Israel-Palestine yet rendered theoretically dubious by a faithful
        adherence to the framework. Section Four considers what Wolfe and
        Veracini, as the emblematic figures in settler colonial studies, have to
        say with regard to possible ‘solutions’ to the conflict. While they present
        very different depictions of the possibilities of decolonization in Israel-
        Palestine, I suggest that both are bounded by certain presumptions that
        flow from New World contexts, which are reductive of the peculiar
        nationalist dimensions of Zionism and fail to fully address the political
        resonances of the distinction between settler and native in that context.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      94                            Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      Israel-Palestine and the Settler Colonial ‘Turn’       
                                                             
      ‘The characterisation of Zionism as a colonial project’, Uri Ram (1993:
      327)writes,‘isprobablyasoldastheZionistmovement’itself.Sincewell
      before the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, Palestinians have
      regarded Zionism as a colonial settler ideology that has sought to expel
      them from their land, with the expansionist aim to claim all of historic
      Palestine as a Jewish state (e.g. Hilal, 1976; Said, 1979; Sayegh, 2012
      [1965]). Drawing attention to the ways in which Zionism is historically
      andideologicallylegitimatedbyEuropeancolonialism,aswellasitsclose
      ties to British imperialism in the Arab world, Palestinians have empha-
      sized Zionism’s unique status as a settler colonialism sans metropole
      driven by diasporic nationalism and a desire for racial exclusivity – a
      desirewhichhasbeenenactedviolentlyandwithdisastrousconsequences
      for Palestinian society. The notion that Zionism is settler colonialist and
      Israel a colonial implant in the Middle East became widely accepted in
      western radical circles in the 1960s and 1970s (e.g. Rodinson, 1973).
      While some peripheral groups in Israel had deemed Zionism a colonial
      and imperial enterprise, most notably the revolutionary socialist organ-
      ization Matzpen (see Bober, 1972), it was not until the wake of the Six
      Day War in 1967 and subsequent settlement project in the occupied
      territories that Israelis came in any substantive way to tussle with the
      colonial aspects of the state. The so-called ‘colonization perspective’ –
      often associated with the New Historians (e.g. Morris, 1988; Pappe,
      1992) – emerged in the 1980s and received some legitimacy in the
      1990s for its framing of Israel as a colonial-settler society and its will-
      ingnesstoexaminethecolonialcharacterofZionistsettlementinhistoric
      Palestine (see Ram, 1993). In contrast to the ‘Jewish bubble’ (Ehrlich,
      1987) of conventional Israeli scholarship, scholars working within the
      colonization perspective sought to bring to the fore the Israeli-
      Palestinian relation as constitutive of Israeli society, variously driving
      patterns of land acquisition (Kimmerling, 1983) and labour market rela-
      tions (Shafir, 1989).                                  
        Thedescription ofIsraelas asettler colonial society,andZionism asa
      settler colonial project, thus has a long heritage in the context of the
      Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as has the notion that the achievement of
      the Zionist national project has been predicated on the destruction of
      the Palestinian one (e.g. Abdo and Yuval-Davis, 1995). The particular
      valueaccordedtolandinZionistcolonization,asopposedtothecreation
      of surplus value from native labour, has similarly been noted as integral
      to Jewish settlement in Palestine (e.g. Hilal, 1976). What is peculiar,
      however, to the current resurgence of settler colonialism in scholarship
      on Israel-Palestine is its connections to the rapid institutionalization of
      settler colonial studies, which has seen settler colonialism accrue particu-
      lar meanings as a phenomenon structurally distinct from (but still

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    95      
                                                             
        entangled with) colonialism. For Lorenzo Veracini (2010: 2–15), settler
        colonialism must be distinguished as a form of migration distinct from
        colonial or imperial migrations, insofar as settlers carry their sovereignty
        withthemandassertitinanewlandmadebyconquest.Asa‘globaland
        genuinely transnational phenomenon’ with a ‘pan-European’ disposition
        (Veracini, 2010: 2), settler colonialism has a number of unique charac-
        teristics which are connected to its (striving for) permanent exogenous
        domination of native populations, including certain mythologies con-
        cerning settler/indigenous difference, an ambivalent relationship to the
        metropole, the settler need to craft an ‘indigenized’ identity and a pre-
        occupation with violence and militarism.             
         It is Wolfe’s work, however, that constitutes the cornerstone of settler
        colonial studies, and is particularly revealing of new trajectories in the-
        orizing settler colonialism in the Israeli-Palestinian context. For Wolfe
        (1994:93),settlercolonialismisnotaquestionoforiginsbutthe‘primary
        structural characteristic of settler society’; that is to say, the moment of
        invasion sets in place a historically continuous structure ‘predicated on
        displacingindigenesfrom(orreplacingthemon)theland’.Whilethereis
        a complex interplay of race, gender, religion, ethnicity and civilizational
        discourse in settler colonial practices and ideologies, it is thus territory
        thatis‘settler colonialism’s specific, irreducible element’ (2006:388).The
        drive for access to territory initiates a structure governed by a logic of
        elimination, which is ‘a sustained institutional tendency to eliminate the
        indigenous population [and] informs a range of historical practices that
        might otherwise appear distinct’ (1999: 163). The logic of elimination is
        absolutely central to Wolfe’s account, laying out a structurality he him-
        self contrasts with the emphasis on European imperialism in Maxime
        Rodinson’s (1973) Israel: A Colonial Settler State? (2012: 286). On the
        one hand, the logic of elimination is omnipresent in settler colonial
        societies, and does not simply manifest in the physical eradication of
        indigenous bodies but undergoes strategic transformations, driving
        ostensibly diverse settler colonial strategies like segregation, miscegen-
        ation, religious conversion, incarceration and assimilation, as well as
        the construction of various racial regimes and racialized categories (see
        Wolfe, 2011). On the other hand, it institutes a ‘fundamental polarity’
        wherein relationsbetween settler and native areentrappedbythe‘binary
        logic of the frontier’, rendering the two identities categorically distinct
        (1994: 98). As opposed to scholarship concerned with mapping different
        typologies of settler-indigenous encounters and identities, then, Wolfe’s
        (2012: 135) account seeks to prioritize the ‘totality of dispossession’ for
        native peoples in settler colonial contexts – thus the primacy of the logic
        of elimination.                                      
         Theanalyticalandpolitical appealofsettlercolonialstudiesforschol-
        arship on Israel-Palestine is evident, given its grounding on an enriched
        and revitalized reworking of older accounts of settler colonialism.

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      96                            Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      There has been great excitement within Palestine studies in particular as
      tothepossibilitiespresentedbythesettlercolonialparadigm,withrecent
      yearswitnessingaveritableboominpublications,panelsandconferences
      adoptingsettlercolonialismasthedefiningframework.OmarSalamanca
      et al. (2012) note that the structural emphasis of settler colonial studies
      has particular significance in the Palestinian context. Given the various
      phasesoftheconflictandsubsequentsplinteringofthePalestinianpopu-
      lace (West Bankers, Jerusalemites, Gazans, citizens of Israel, refugees
      and diaspora), the settler colonial paradigm offers a holistic perspective
      thatbringstotheforefrontthesystematicpatternofZionistcolonization
      vis-a`-visthePalestinians.Importantly,itpresentsal-Nakba(thecatastro-
      phe), in which some 750,000 Palestinians were forcibly displaced follow-
      ing the establishment of the Israeli state, as both a continuation of the
      colonization that preceded it and an ongoing reality shaping Palestinian
      society and Israeli-Palestinian relations.             
        Scholars have employed the settler colonial paradigm to engage
      and illuminate different aspects of the conflict, ranging from contradic-
      tions in Zionist discourse (Lloyd, 2012) to the steady support offered to
      Israel by its international settler colonial counterparts like the United
      States and Australia (Chomsky and Pappe, 2015). There have even
      been efforts to interpret ancient Israel in settler colonial terms, reading
      the settler colonialist drive towards violence and genocide into the bib-
      lical texts legitimating the Zionist project in Eretz Yisrael (Pitka¨nen,
      2014). The paradigm has garnered particular interest from scholars
      working on Palestinians citizens of Israel, who have sought to document
      theuniqueformsofsettlercolonialcontroltheIsraelistateadoptsinrela-
      tion to its Arab populations and the rising centrality of al-Nakba
      in Palestinian citizenship struggles (e.g. Jamal, 2011; Rouhana and
      Sabbagh-Khoury, 2014), as well as the particular circumstances of
      Bedouin battling the Judaization of the Naqab/Negev desert in southern
      Israel (e.g. Nasasra, 2012). Significantly, much of this scholarship has
      been published in the Settler Colonial Studies journal, which has had
      three special issues dedicated to Israel-Palestine since Veracini first (co-)
      founded it in 2011.1                                   
        Comparative analysis has, however,beenthe definingcharacteristic of
      this new wave of scholarship, with comparison widely heralded as an
      indispensable means with which to undo the discourse of exceptionality
      thathaslongframedtheconflict(Lloyd,2012;Piterberg,2013).Asmuch
      as earlier literature also drew parallels between Israel’s treatment of the
      Palestinians and societies with settler colonial dimensions like Australia
      and apartheid South Africa (Ram, 1993), with the latter in particular
      inspiring significant scholarship engaging the parallels between the
      legal-political regimes of separatism and theologically inspired racial
      superiority in the two countries (e.g. Akenson, 1992), scholarship
      mountedwithinthesettlercolonialparadigmhassoughttosubstantively

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    97      
                                                             
        bring Israel into direct comparison with places where indigenous peoples
        have been violently dispossessed and incorporated into settler states.
        While, in theory, settler colonial studies is open to broad sites of com-
        parison–Wolfe (2012:86)claims thatheaspiresto a‘generalaccount of
        settler colonialism...able to include relationships such as those between
        Chinese and Tibetans, Tswana and Khoi-San, Russians and Chechens
        and Indonesians and Papuans [as well as] the Irish, Basque or Sami
        peoples’ – in practice there is a particularly strong emphasis on white
        European settler colonialisms in Australasia and the Americas where the
        logic of elimination – as opposed to the logic of exploitation – features
        most heavily.2 This tendency is similarly evident in comparative work on
        Israel-Palestine. Notwithstanding comparisons with the Basel Mission in
        West Africa and pre-Zionist Christian colonization in Palestine (Pappe,
        2008), the vast majority of contemporary comparative analysis has
        centred on three sites: Australia, Canada and the United States.
        Australia and Israel, for example, have been compared with regard to
        their mutual disavowal of the founding violence constitutive of their
        respective states (Veracini, 2003; Farid, 2010) and the militarization of
        their respective nationalisms (Sahhar, 2015). The similarities in the gen-
        dered, racialized and sexualized aspects of the settler colonial projects in
        Israel and Canada have been analysed, with a focus on the dynamics of
        (queer and non-queer) native struggles (Krebs and Olwan, 2012;
        Morgensen, 2012). The ideology of manifest destiny so crucial to
        the mythology of Northern American settlement has been brought into
        comparison with the biblical justifications of Zionism, as have the affect-
        ive connections between Palestinians and Native Americans by virtue of
        their mutual dispossession (Mikdashi, 2012; Salaita, 2006; Waziyatawin,
        2012).AndwithaspecialforuminAmericanQuarterly,theparadigmhas
        even been stretched to compare the situation of Palestinians with
        Chicano/a incorporated into the US Southwest following the American
        victory in the 1848 Mexican-American war (see Lloyd and Pulido, 2010;
        also Lubin, 2008; Sa´nchez and Pita, 2014).          
        (Re)framing the Conflict                             
        If the settler colonial paradigm has done much to bring back and crys-
        tallize settler colonialism as a key interpretive framework in Palestinian
        and Israeli scholarship (Salamanca et al., 2012: 2), its main significance
        arguably lies in the broader arena of the international. While the 1960s
        and 1970s saw a reasonable amount of international solidarity for the
        Palestinian cause as an anti-colonial struggle, particularly in relation to
        the Third World movement, it is nevertheless Israel that has historically
        commanded greater support and had most influence on discourse con-
        cerningtheconflict(Said,1979).Theaccusationofcolonialismleveraged
        against Zionism has generally been received with great repugnance by
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      98                            Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      JewishIsraelis(saveforaminorityofscholarsandactivists),andisoften
      portrayed as either an attack on the legitimacy of the State of Israel or
      evidence of anti-Semitism. This manoeuvre – commonly employed in
      Israeli public diplomacy (hasbara) efforts and by pro-Israel advocates –
      has been relatively successful in keeping the colonial question out of the
      international arena. The World Trade Center terrorist attacks in 2001
      also augmented the strong documented western media bias against the
      Palestinians, wherein the Israelis areportrayed as peaceful and willing to
      compromise and the Palestinians as unreasonable and belligerent
      (Finkelstein, 2003). With Israel negotiating the violence of the second
      Intifada around the same time as the ‘War on Terror’ was mounted, the
      Palestiniancausewas easilyalignedwithIslamicterrorism inthewestern
      media, with Israel in turn portrayed as on the frontlines of the supposed
      ‘clash of civilizations’.                              
        In this regard, the settler colonial paradigm offers a radically different
      framing of the conflict than what has come to be fairly standard in the
      international arena. Framing, in social movement theory, is not about
      ideas ‘but ways of packaging and presenting ideas that generate shared
      beliefs, motivate collective action and define appropriate strategies of
      action’ (Merry, 2006: 41). As a repackaging of the Israeli-Palestinian
      conflict, the settler colonial paradigm is incredibly important as an
      alternative vocabulary that not just reduces its exceptionality but is
      alsocomprehensibleandlegibletoaninternationalaudience,particularly
      thosealreadyengagedinindigenousoranti-colonialpolitics.Itaddition-
      ally provides a means for scholars and activists (especially those living
      in settler societies themselves) to make sense of the conflict based on
      their own experiences and understandings. From this perspective,
      the comparative bent of settler colonial studies is remarkably crucial,
      and it is apparent that many such contributions are written with as
      much pedagogical intent as they are scholarly. Michael Brull (2014),
      for example, frames his essay by emphasizing that ‘Australians should
      bewell equipped to understanding the Israel-Palestinian conflict’. Others
      have utilized comparison to make broader reflections on how ‘particular
      sites of state and imperial rule [are] constitutive of larger global systems
      andcircuitsofpower’,asameanstobothilluminatetheconflictinIsrael-
      Palestine and detail the complicity of the international community in its
      continuance (Lubin, 2008: 684).                        
        On this point, it is salient to note that Israel-Palestine has increasingly
      come to play an important role in the transnational aspirations of settler
      colonial studies, which has had significant normalizing effects in that the
      conflict itself is often regarded as exemplary of ‘settler colonialism as a
      globalhistoricalstructuralforce’(Collins,2011:30).JohnCollins(2011),
      forinstance,hasaccordedPalestineapropheticroleintheglobalstruggle
      against colonialism and imperialism. If Palestine is being globalized,
      he contends, the globe is simultaneously being ‘Palestinianized’,

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    99      
                                                             
        as Israel exports military techniques and mechanisms of surveillance and
        social control developed in the occupied territories to the international
        marketplace(seealsoHalper,2015).Similarly,GhassanHage(2014:7–9)
        suggests that Israel is emblematic of what he calls ‘the globalization
        of the late modern settler colonial condition’, which designates a trans-
        national imaginary characterized by an aggressive monoculturalism and
        an attempt to shore up society against the perceived barbarism of an
        enemy other. In Hage’s (2014: 9) account, it is the West that is being
        ‘Israelized’, as Israel becomes a model of ‘what dominant forces in the
        West, at least subliminally, [aspire] to be’ and the ‘Israeli ethos of a
        besieged white colonial settler society’ has taken ‘hold in the generalisa-
        tion of the Western conception of the self’.         
         Frames‘assignmeaningtoandinterpretrelevanteventsandconditions
        in ways that are intended to mobilize potential adherents and constitu-
        ents, to garner bystander support, and to demobilize antagonists’ (Snow
        andBenford,1998:198).Thesettlercolonialparadigmiscrucialinopen-
        ing up space for new transnational alliances and political
        solidarities because it increases the readability and accessibility of the
        Palestinian struggle in sympathetic terms. Whereas earlier comparisons
        with South Africa brought apartheid into the critical lexicons of
        Palestinian solidarity and activism, thus underscoring the primacy of
        racism in Zionist ideology (Machover, 2004), the settler colonial para-
        digm reorients the structural relationship between Palestinians and
        Israelis away from adversaries (or, at the furthest end of the hasbara
        scale, perpetrators/victims) to that of native/settler. This is a powerful,
        ifnotdecisive,discursiveoverturningofpresumedpowerrelations,given
        theimplicationsof‘fragility’thatdefineindigenouspeoplesinrelationto
        their settler colonizers (Veracini, 2011) and the moral and international
        legitimacy it gives the Palestinian struggle. Many newly emerging trans-
        nationalallianceswithPalestinehaveindeedcoalescedaroundtheideaof
        nativesolidarity(e.g.KrebsandOlwan,2012;Waziyatawin,2012).Queer
        struggles have similarly isolated Palestine as a point of solidarity, largely
        in response to Israel’s ‘pinkwashing’ of itself as a LGBTI haven and the
        increased mobilization of indigenous queers (Morgensen, 2012). While
        the political identity of ‘settler’ is one that has yet to be taken up in any
        significant way inside Israel as a source of solidarity with Palestinians,
        notwithstandingmarginalorganizationslikeZochrot,whichaimstodraw
        Jewish attention to al-Nakba,3 it is increasingly becoming important for
        Jewish Left organizing in the diaspora (e.g. Brull, 2014).
        From Two States to Decolonization                    
        In order to be relevant, discursive frames must have resonance with
        existing social and political conditions. The solidarity and sympathy
        for the Palestinian cause stimulated by the settler colonial paradigm
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      100                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      must also be read as entangled with the mounting disenchantment in
      international politics and media with Israeli intransigence concerning a
      two-state solution (e.g. Lustick, 2013). While the two-state solution
      does, broadly speaking, remain hegemonic in mainstream discussion and
      debate,ithasincreasinglybeenbroughtintodoubtbythetenaciousnessof
      Israeli settlement building in the West Bank. With one in four individuals
      in the West Bank now an Israeli settler (Hilal, 2015: 354), and persistent
      callsintheKnessettoannexlargeswathesofoccupiedterritoryintoIsrael
      (see Lazaroff, 2014), the so-called ‘facts on the ground’ are now widely
      considered to render any form of two-state solution exceedingly challen-
      ging (e.g. Bashir, 2015). As such, recent years have seen an explosion of
      work from scholars seeking to illuminate alternatives to the two-state
      model, with the one-state solution – which advocates for a single demo-
      cratic state for Jewish Israelis and Palestinians – emerging as particularly
      influential amongst critical Left interlocutors (see Faris, 2013).
        The structural perspective offered by the settler colonial paradigm has
      provenparticularlypowerfulinthiscontext.Ontheonehand,itsreintro-
      duction of the colonial question portends to do much to revitalize the
      Palestinian struggle which has been dulled by the two-state hegemon,
      especially since the establishment of the Palestinian Authority in 1994
      (Hilal, 2015). On the other hand, it is revealing of the partiality of the
      focus on1967 as per the two-state solution, highlighting as central to the
      conflict the creation of the Israeli state and the Zionist project more
      broadly. By bringing the Palestinians into collective focus as a whole,
      thesettlercolonialframeworkanalyticallyfacilitatestheleapfromatwo-
      state paradigm – ostensibly concerned with Gazans and West Bankers –
      to a one-state paradigm that includes other Palestinian constituencies,
      most notably Palestinians in Israel who have been sidelined by conflict
      resolution efforts, rendering once again salient wider issues like land, the
      return of refugees and – importantly – the identity of the Israeli state
      (Jamal, 2011: 5). From a settler colonial perspective, the state-building
      frameworkofthetwo-statesolution,anditsstatedgoalofestablishingan
      Arab Palestinian state alongside a Jewish one, is necessarily incomplete
      because it leaves intact the exclusivist structures of Zionism. As such,
      the settler colonial paradigm speaks against the entire notion of the
      ‘peace process’ as it has come to be understood in Israel-Palestine,
      which is not only regarded as fraudulent but suggestive of a parity
      between parties that does not exist, underlining instead ‘the need to
      develop a praxis that brings back decolonisation and liberation as the
      imperativegoal’(Salamancaetal.,2012:4).Afterall,ifcolonialismisthe
      diagnosis, the prescription can only be decolonization. As Pappe (2013:
      350) urges, ‘it is time to adopt a new dictionary that views Israel as a
      settler colonial state and the Palestinians as leading an anti-colonial
      struggle. Decolonisation is more relevant [than] a ‘‘peace process’’ for
      the torn land of Palestine and Israel’.                

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    101     
                                                             
         The prescription for decolonization – that is, a normative project
        committedtotheliberationofthecolonizedandtheoverturningofcolo-
        nial relationships of power (Kohn and McBride, 2011: 3) – is indeed
        one of the most counter-hegemonic implications of the settler colonial
        paradigm as applied to Israel-Palestine, potentially shifting it from a
        diagnostic frame to a prognostic one which offers a ‘proposed solution
        to the problem, or at least a plan of attack’ (Benford and Snow, 2000:
        616). What, however, does the settler colonial paradigm offer by way
        of envisioning decolonization? As Veracini (2007) notes, while settler
        colonial studies scholars have sought to address the lack of attention
        paid to the experiences of indigenous peoples in conventional his-
        toriographical accounts of decolonization (which have mostly focused
        on settler independence and the loosening of ties to the ‘motherland’),
        there is nevertheless a ‘narrative deficit’ when it comes to imagining set-
        tler decolonization. While Veracini (2007) relates this deficit to a matter
        of conceptualization, it is apparent that the structural perspective of the
        paradigminmanywaysclosesdownpossibilitiesofimaginingthetypeof
        socialandpoliticaltransformationtowhichthenotionofdecolonization
        aspires. In this regard, there is a worrying tendency (if not tautological
        discrepancy) in settler colonial studies, where the only solution to settler
        colonialism is decolonization – which a faithful adherence to the para-
        digm renders largely unachievable, if not impossible.
         To understand why this is the case, it is necessary to return to Wolfe’s
        (2013a:257)accountofsettlercolonialismasguidedbya‘zero-sumlogic
        whereby settler societies, for all their internal complexities, uniformly
        require the elimination of Native alternatives’. The structuralism of
        this account has immense power as a means of mapping forms of injust-
        iceandindignityaswellasstrategiesofresistanceandrefusal,andWolfe
        is careful to show how transmutations of the logic of elimination are
        complex,variable,discontinuousanduneven.Yet,inseekingtoelucidate
        thelogicofeliminationastheoverarchinghistoricalforceguidingsettler-
        native relations there is an operational weakness in the theory, whereby
        such a logic is simply there, omnipresent and manifest even when
        (and perhaps especially when) it appears not to be; the settler colonial
        studies scholar need only read it into a situation or context. It thus hur-
        tles from the past to the present into the future, never to be fully extin-
        guished until the native is, or until history itself ends. There is thus a
        powerfulontological(ifnotmetaphysical)dimensiontoWolfe’saccount,
        where there is such thing as a ‘settler will’ that inherently desires the
        elimination of the native and the distinction between the settler and the
        native can only ever be categorical, founded as it is on the ‘primal binar-
        ism of the frontier’ (2013a: 258). It is here that the differences between
        earlier settler colonial scholarship on Israel-Palestine and the recent set-
        tler colonial turn come into clearest view. While Jamal Hilal’s (1976)
        Marxist account of the conflict, for instance, engaged Palestinians and

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      102                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      Jewish Israelis in terms of their relations to the means of production,
      Wolfe’s account brings its own ontology: the bourgeoisie/proletariat dis-
      tinction becomes that of settler/native, and the class struggle the struggle
      between settler, who seeks to destroy and replace the native, and native,
      who can only ever push back. Indeed, if the settler colonial paradigm
      views history in similar teleological terms to the Marxist framework, it
      does not offer the same hopeful vision of a liberated future. After all,
      settlercolonialismhasonlyonestorytotell–‘eithertotalvictoryortotal
      failure’ (Veracini, 2007).                             
        Veracini’s attempt to disaggregate different forms of settler decolon-
      ization is revealing of the difficulties that come along with this zero-sum
      perspective.Itissignificanttonotethatbeyondsettlerevacuation(which
      may decolonize territory, he cautions, but not necessarily relationships)
      the picture he paints is a relatively bleak one. For Veracini (2011: 5),
      claims for decolonization from indigenous peoples in settler societies can
      take two broad forms: an ‘anti-colonial rhetoric expressing a demand
      for indigenous sovereign independence and self-determination...and
      an ‘‘ultra’’-colonial one that seeks a reconstituted partnership with the
      [settler state] and advocates a return to a relatively more respectful
      middle ground and ‘‘treaty’’ conditions’. While both, he suggests, are
      tempting strategies in the struggle for change, though ‘ultimately inef-
      fective against settler colonial structures of domination’ (2011: 5), it is
      the latter strategy that invites Veracini’s most scathing assessment. As
      he writes,                                             
        under settler colonial conditions the independent polity is the
        settler polity and sanctioning the equal rights of indigenous
        peoples has historically been used as a powerful weapon in the
        denial of indigenous entitlement and in the enactment of various
        forms of coercive assimilation. This decolonisation actually
        enhances the subjection of indigenous peoples...it is at best irrele-
        vantand at worst detrimental to indigenous peoples in settler socie-
        ties. (2011: 6–7)                                    
        The ‘primal binarism of the frontier’ plays a particularly ambivalent
      role in Veracini’s (2011: 6) formulation, where the categorical distinction
      between settler and native obstructs the ‘possibility of a genuinely deco-
      lonized relationship’ (by virtue of its lopsidedness) yet is a necessary
      political strategy to guard against the absorption of indigenous people
      into the settler fold, which would represent settler colonialism’s final
      victory.Thebattlehereisbetweena‘settlercolonialism[that]isdesigned
      toproduceafundamentaldiscontinuityasits‘‘logicofelimination’’runs
      its course until it actually extinguishes the settler colonial relation’ and
      an anti-colonial struggle that ‘must aim to keep the settler-indigenous
      relationship going’ (2011: 7). In other words, the categorical distinction
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    103     
                                                             
        produced by the frontier must be maintained in order to struggle against
        its effects. Given the lack of options presented to indigenous peoples by
        Veracini(2014:315),hisconclusionthatsettlerdecolonizationdemandsa
        ‘radical, post-settler colonial passage’ is perhaps not surprising –
        although he has ‘no suggestion as to how this may be achieved and [is]
        pessimistic about its feasibility’.                  
         Scholars have long reckoned with the ambivalence of the settler colo-
        nial situation, which is simultaneously colonial and postcolonial, colo-
        nizing and decolonizing (Curthoys, 1999: 288). Given the generally
        dreadful Fourth World circumstances facing many indigenous peoples
        in settler societies, it could be argued that there is good reason for such
        pessimism. The settler colonial paradigm, in this sense, offers an import-
        ant caution against celebratory narratives of progress. Wolfe (1994), it
        must be recalled, wrote the original articulation of his thesis precisely
        against the idea of ‘historical rupture’ that dominated in Australia post-
        Mabo,andwasthusasmuchascholarlyinterventionasitwasapolitical
        challenge to the idea of Australia having broken with its colonial past.
        Nonetheless, the fatalism of the settler colonial paradigm – whereby
        decolonization is by and large put beyond the realms of possibility –
        has seen it come under considerable critique for reifying settler colo-
        nialism as a transhistorical meta-structure where colonial relations of
        domination are inevitable (Macoun and Strakosch, 2013: 435 ;
        Snelgrove et al., 2014: 9). Not only does Wolfe’s ontology erase contin-
        gency,heterogeneityand(crucially)agency(Merlan,1997;Rowse,2014),
        but its polarized framework effectively ‘puts politics to death’ (Svirsky,
        2014:327).Inresponsetosuchcritiques,Wolfe(2013a:213)suggeststhat
        ‘the repudiation of binarism’ may just represent a ‘settler perspective’.
        However,asElizabethPovinelli(1997:22)hasastutelyshown,itisinthis
        regardthatthetotalizing logicof Wolfe’sstructure ofinvasionrestsona
        disciplinary gesture where ‘any discussion which does not insist on the
        polarity of the [settler] colonial project’ is assimilationist, worse still,
        genocidal in effect if not intent. Any attempt to ‘explore the dialogical
        or hybrid nature of colonial subjectivity’ – which would entail working
        beyondtheboundsofabsolutepolarity–isdisciplinedascomplicitinthe
        settlercolonialprojectitself,leaving‘theonlynonassimilationistposition
        one that adheres strictly and solely to a critique of [settler] state dis-
        course’. This gesture notonly disallows the possibility of counter-publics
        and strategic alliances (even limited ones), but also comes dangerously
        close to ‘resistance as acquiescence’ insofar as the settler colonial studies
        scholar may malign the structures set in play by settler colonialism, but
        only from a safe distance unsullied by the messy ambivalences and
        contradictions of settler and native subjectivities and relations.
        Opposition is thus left as our only option, but, as we know from critical
        anti-colonial and postcolonial scholarship, opposition in itself is not
        decolonization.                                      

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      104                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      Decolonizing Israel-Palestine?                         
                                                             
      Inhisdefenseofsettlercolonialstudiesagainstcriticismsthatitisunable
      to account for political action, Veracini (2014: 312) has maintained that
      settler colonialism is an interpretive paradigm, not a transformative one:
      ‘settler colonial studies’, hewrites, ‘is onlyultimately accountableforthe
      way it is effective in explaining things’. Yet, as I have already noted, this
      is not precisely the case in the context of Israel-Palestine. Not only is the
      settler colonial paradigm increasingly associated with particular norma-
      tiveprojects,namelyacritiqueofthetwo-statesolutionandadvocacyfor
      a single democratic state (e.g. Collins, 2011), but both Veracini and
      Wolfe have ventured into the question of ‘solutions’ in their respective
      accounts of the dynamics of Zionist settler colonialism. While they
      are quitedivergent in theirreadings of whatit wouldmean to decolonize
      Israel-Palestine, I suggest that they are nevertheless indicative of the
      limitations of the settler colonial paradigm’s structural perspective,
      which flattens manifestations of settler colonialism and lends itself to
      certain parameters. These parameters neglect important differences
      between Israel-Palestine and its typical sites of comparison – not least
      of which is the relative ‘completeness’ of settler ethnic cleansing efforts
      and the political geographies and modes of legal governance they pro-
      duce (Gordon and Ram, 2016) – which have important implications
      for any project of decolonization. After all, if there is there is no one-
      size-fits-all model of colonialism, there is no route to decolonization
      appropriate to all contexts (see Kohn and McBride, 2011). In this last
      section, I want to engage Veracini’s and Wolfe’s accounts as a means
      to trace some of these areas of neglect, and, in so doing, gesture towards
      issues in need of serious reckoning in the settler-colonial paradigm’s
      prescription for decolonization.                       
        ForVeracini(2013:26),theconflictisbestunderstoodintermsofhow
      the Zionist settler colonial project to establish a Jewish-majority state in
      historic Palestine is complicated and compromised by the ongoing occu-
      pation. If successis a matterof perceived legitimacy, Veracini takes1967
      as marking a decline in the success of Israeli settler colonial practice
      and suggests that the occupation itself is an instance of failed settler
      colonialism, insofar as Israel has largely failed in having its West Bank
      settlements recognized as part of the settler colonial state (p. 30). When
      settler colonialism fails in its attempt to extinguish the colonial relation,
      he asserts, it reverts to colonialism where the colonial relation is
      underscored. This explains both the permanency of the occupation – if
      ‘the Occupation was established as a means to enable permanent settle-
      ments, now it is the settlements that perpetuate the need for permanent
      occupation’ – and the radical turn to the Right inside Israel, which has
      seen ‘the integration of Israeli Arabs...progressively reversed’ and the
      ‘autonomyofthesettlercolonialprojecteroded’byanincreasingreliance

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    105     
                                                             
        on external support from international allies and the Jewish diaspora
        (pp. 32–3). This ‘simultaneous coexistence of successful and failed settler
        colonialisms’ (p. 39) means that ‘approaching the conflict would prob-
        ably require a suite of solutions’ (p. 27). Nevertheless, Veracini is rather
        coy about what these may be. On the one hand, he emphasizes that the
        ‘decolonization paradigm’ is only really available to the West Bank and
        Gaza Strip, and that other frameworks must be made available to
        Palestinians inside Israel and those in the diaspora who, by virtue of
        the success of the Israeli settler project inside Israel, have effectively
        had decolonization taken off the table (p. 40). On the other hand, he
        seems to suggest that any solution will nonetheless be unable to escape
        the colonial conditions that have shaped it. If two-states is a ‘colonial
        solution’, because ‘internationally sanctioned Palestinian independence
        (and associated forms of neo-colonial dependency)...should be seen as
        the colonial occupation’s logical outcome, not its demise’, one-state
        ‘turns out to be the settler colonial solution’ because it signals the per-
        manency of the settler polity (pp. 33, 39).          
         Wolfe (2012), in contrast, is far more direct about his preference for a
        single democratic and secular state in Israel-Palestine. The two-state
        solution, he suggests, is not only ‘liberal subterfuge’, but an oxymoron,
        because of its inability to reckon with the ways in which the ‘New Jew’
        Zionism has sought to construct needs the contrapuntal presence of the
        Palestinians to come into being – without the Palestinians, Israel would
        fracture under the weight of its own internal diversity (pp. 319–20).
        Wolfe is especially troubled by the religious/secular division that plagues
        Zionism as an ostensibly secular national movement framed around the
        notion of Jewish return, and which has become more politically salient
        with the religious-national settlement movement that has taken hold in
        Israeli politics since the late 1970s. The ‘ascendancy of [this] religious
        element’ is of particular concern, loading the settler will to eliminate
        the native with an additional theological dimension; should Israel
        ‘be finally cleansed of its Natives’, he warns, it would only be ‘left with
        achoicebetween theocracyandimplosion’ (p.318).Thustheappealofa
        single state solution: not only does it deal with the tricky questions
        of territory and sovereignty in one fell swoop, but it also does away
        with this risk of theocracy. Additionally, it dissolves the ‘irreducible
        contradictions between Zionism’s twin goals of territorial expansion
        and ethno-racial exclusiveness’: ‘in a secular state...that exists for its
        citizens rather than co-religionists this intractable problem disappears’
        (p. 321). The desire for ethnic purity that has characterized Zionism to
        date becomes its greatest asset in this regard, namely because it does not
        allow for the assimilation of Palestinians. Thus, for Wolfe,
         [r]ather than absorbing the colonised population into the ranks of
         the colonisers, and thereby eliminating that population, a secular
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
        democracy does not require the elimination of either – or, better,
        any – of its constituent ethnicities. That is the whole point. (p. 321)
                                                             
      Inthissense,‘aunifiedstatenotonlydismantlesZionism.Intheprocess,
      it dismantles settler colonialism’ (p. 321).           
        If Veracini offers a seemingly impossible vision of decolonization
      in Israel-Palestine, where any solution would be compromised by the
      colonial conditions preceding it, Wolfe’s vision seems in comparison
      impossibly easy: not only can Zionism bedismantled, but so too can set-
      tler colonialism. This isin stark (andsurprising) contrast to hisgenerally
      fatalistic take on structural transformation in settler colonial societies.
      It is, however, particularly revealing of the tendency in settler colonial
      scholarship to regard Zionism as purely settler colonial and the conflict
      akin to any other settler colonial context (e.g. Collins, 2011). Both
      VeraciniandWolfeareguiltyofthis,evenastheyareotherwiseattentive
      to many of the particularities of the conflict. Wolfe (2013b: 9), for
      instance, identifies ‘Zionism as settler colonialism pure and simple’, if
      not a particularly voracious form stuck at the frontier stage. Likewise,
      Veracini (2015: 1–2) suggests that the ‘settlement, nothing else, [is] the
      absolutecoreofZionistpractice’,goingsofarastoclaimthat‘whatisin
      front of us is not a conflict situation, it is actually a postconflict’ (‘post-
      conflicts’, he notes, ‘are rarely peaceful’). Tim Rowse (2014) has argued
      the tendency towards ahistorical and decontextualized analysis in settler
      colonialstudiesmeansthatitmissesmuchaboutthevarietyofgeograph-
      ical and regional forms settler colonialism takes.     
        It is equally important, however, to recognize that the settler colonial
      frame itself is by no means ahistorical or decontextualized. To the con-
      trary, settler colonial studies is very much an Antipodean perspective,
      having emerged primarily within an Australian context, and it is fair to
      say that this is evidenced in its main preoccupation with white settler
      societies.Whilealltransnationalframeshavetobedevelopedsomewhere,
      the structural emphasis of the settler colonial paradigm not only obfus-
      cates this local heritage but means that its vernacularization is often rep-
      lication, which is where the ‘imported institution remains largely
      unchangedfromitstransnationalprototype[and]theadaptationissuper-
      ficialandprimarilydecorative’(Merry,2006:44).Thiscanbeevidencedin
      WolfeandVeracini’srespectiveaccountsofdecolonizingIsrael-Palestine,
      which leave the national dimensions of the conflict under-examined and
      fail to address the unique affective and socio-political resonances of the
      native/settler distinction in the Israeli-Palestinian context.
        As Wolfe (2012: 287) points out, the circumstances and intentions of
      settlercolonizersisinconsequentialfromanativepointofview,andboth
      heandVeraciniperhapsquiterightlyprioritizethehistoricaloutcomesof
      Zionism (namely, the displacement of the Palestinians) over all other
      meanings attached to it. Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    107     
                                                             
        there is a strong nationalist aspect to Zionism, which is after all a
        national movement geared towards Jewish self-determination. This
        marksitasaparticularlyunique–althoughnotsingular–formofsettler
        colonialism. In contrast to settler colonies like Australia where the drive
        for a settler identity separate from the metropole only emerged much
        later, the impetus towards an exclusive form of settler self-determination
        has shaped almost all aspects of the conflict in Israel-Palestine since at
        least the second aliyah that reached Palestine between 1904 and 1914
        (see Shafir, 1989). Of course, Zionism is not the only colonialist project
        tobecarriedoutinthenameofostensiblynationalistideals–theFrench
        colonization of Algeria is widely cited as a case in point (Pappe, 2008:
        612–13). Yet, it does mean that understanding Zionism’s nationalist
        impulse is crucial to understandings its political strengths and continued
        affective resonance; ‘a simple dismissal of Zionism’, Jacqueline Rose
        (2005:13)appeals,‘fatallyunderminesthecaseitisintendedtopromote’.
        Moreover, as Pappe (2008: 613) stresses, ‘labelling Zionism as nationalist
        or national [by no means] absolve[s] it from the accusations of disposses-
        sion and occupation’ (my emphasis). Nor does it lessen its crimes
        against the Palestinian people. While the Palestinian anti-colonialism
        has historically been entangled with a broader pan-Arabism, it is simi-
        larly impossible to understand it outside of a nationalist vocabulary and
        the struggle for national self-determination (Said, 1979).
         Given that the settler paradigm is nominally able to incorporate the
        Palestinian struggle for national self-determination under the rubric of
        decolonization, it is striking that neither Wolfe nor Veracini reckon in
        any rigorous way with implications of Palestinian nationalism in their
        respective accounts.4 Wolfe’s (2012: 231) one-state, for instance, ‘does
        not require the elimination of its constituent ethnicities’, neglecting not
        only that the affirmation of those ethnicities is also a powerful political
        driver in the ongoing conflict, but that the affirmation of identity for
        colonized peoples has been a defining feature of decolonizing projects
        in general (Fanon, 1967). Veracini’s (2013) efforts at disentangling the
        colonial from the settler colonial would similarly seem to reinforce
        the Green Line’s fragmentation of the Palestinian polity into those in
        the ‘territories’ and those inside ‘Israel proper’, thus undermining the
        paradigm’s potential to aid Palestinian nation-building efforts.
         The lack of attention paid to the Jewish drive for ethno-national self-
        determination, however, is not surprising. From the perspective of
        settler colonial studies, the question of settler self-determination is an
        especially fraught one: not only is it seen as a particular historical relic
        (loosening ties to the ‘motherland’), but settler colonial scholarship has
        concerned itself precisely with critiquing how the notion of settler self-
        determination legitimizes continued dominance over indigenous peoples.
        Additionally, in the context of contemporary white settler societies like
        Australia, Canada and the United States, the claim for ethno-national

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      self-determination simplydoesnotmakesense(saveforafewatthevery
      periphery of politics) given thatthe shapeof the polity is morecivic than
      ethnic. Indeed, it is the settler colonial polity’s ability to subsume indi-
      genous alterity that is regarded as most troubling in the settler colonial
      paradigm; assimilation is, after all, the final stage in the logic of elimin-
      ation (Wolfe,1994).It isfrom thisperspective thatwecan makesense of
      Veracini’s insistence that the one-state is the settler colonial solution.
      Yet, as Wolfe makes clear, Zionism has little capacity to assimilate
      Palestinians: the lines of identity, driven as they are by a dichotomy of
      Jew/non-Jew determined by a tribal notion of maternal blood-lineage,
      are simply too firm for serious parallels to be made between Israel and
      the white settler societies with which it is typically compared. While
      Wolfe’s (2012: 320) account is more sensitive to these dynamics, his
      vision of a secular, civic, inclusive and plural united state (which he
      interestingly addresses to European Ashkenazi Jews) would nevertheless
      seem to leave aside the ways in which such plurality isfiercely charged in
      the Israeli-Palestinian context –and is, mostcertainly, also characterized
      by a religious dimension for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
        Inthisregard,Wolfereplicatesmuchdebateontheone-statesolution,
      which presumes that Jews would be incorporated into a single state as a
      neutralandrepentantcollectivity(Farsakh,2011:70).Ifevenaone-state
      solution would have to reckon with the reality that the very presence of
      Israeli Jews as a settler collective is grounded on a history of disposses-
      sion and occupation, then surely dismantling Zionism – as per Wolfe’s
      wish – is not enough to dismantle settler colonialism. Perhaps the ques-
      tion is less one of dismantling Zionism than it is of decolonizing Jewish
      Israeli identity and its settler colonial privileges which, as Theodora
      Todorova (2015) argues, are most powerfully connected to the Jewish
      right to return – a right in turn denied to the Palestinians. This is some-
      thing missed by Veracini, who takes the intimate connections between
      IsraelandtheJewishdiasporaasasignofweaknessinthesettlercolonial
      project, when this complicated entanglement with diaspora is in fact
      constitutive of Zionist settler colonialism.           
        If Wolfe and Veracini fail to fully engage the conflict’s nationalist
      dimensions, they are also strangely silent on the resonances and implica-
      tions of the settler/native distinction in the Israeli-Palestinian context.
      Indeed, one of the weaknesses of the settler colonial paradigm as a
      whole is its inability to fully reckon with indigenous and settler identities
      as interactive, mutable and contingent processes of social signification.
      For Wolfe, thenative/settler distinction is only socially constructed inso-
      farasitisforgedatthemomentthesettlerdecidesshewantstostay;yet,
      as Francesca Merlan (2009) has argued, ‘indigeneity’ as a transnational
      category cannot be understood outside of the historical processes which
      brought it into being, nor can it be considered inherently oppositional.
      Counter to most white settler nations where the settler/native distinction

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    109     
                                                             
        hasbeenlargelynormalizedintopoliticsandculture(thesettlermayseek
        to ‘indigenize’, but they are under no illusions that they are
        ‘indigenous’ per se), it is important to recognize that the identities of
        settler and indigene are not only constructed but also vehemently con-
        tested in Israel-Palestine. Rightfully or not, the notion of Jewish return
        inherent to Zionism means that Israel could be nothing if not ‘native’, to
        paraphrase Edward Said (1979: 88). As much as the state is consciously
        engaged in an active process of indigenizing its Jewish population
        through forging an imagined geography of exclusive Jewish ownership
        (AbuEl-Haj,2003),thiscouldnothaveclaimedsomuchsuccesswithout
        the pervasiveness of the narrative that ‘we were here first’.
         The identity of settler is equally loaded in the Israeli context. This
        means that it has quite different connotations than in white settler socie-
        ties, where it is more an affective category connected to feelings of his-
        toricalguiltornation-buildingprocessesthatreckonwithpastinjustice–
        which are often about seeking retroactive legitimacy for the settler state,
        and thus require a relatively established and secure polity. While there is
        nodoubtthatthesettleridentityresonateswiththe‘dormantcodesofthe
        immigrant settler political culture’ that characterized Zionism pre-1948
        (Kimmerling, 2005: 232), the meanings attached to ‘settler’ are neverthe-
        less complicated by the active settlement project in the territories. This is
        somethingofwhichtheultranationalistsettlerconstituencyhassoughtto
        take advantage, pointing to the inconsistencies in the liberal Zionist
        insistence on seeing West Bank settlement as illegitimate while glossing
        over the settlement history of Tel Aviv, for instance (Lustick, 2015).
        Certainly, the long-held existential fear of being ‘driven into the sea’
        explains the aversion of many Israelis to the implications of illegitimacy
        containedwithinthe‘settler’category;perhapsmoresinisterly,theobser-
        vation that settler states require relatively complete ethnic cleansing in
        order to normalize (Gordon and Ram, 2016) may only serve to push the
        Israeli public further to the right.                 
         Most significant, however, is the lack of attention Wolfe and Veracini
        pay to how the status of the Palestinians as an indigenous people might
        legitimately frame their struggle. Certainly, for a paradigm thatpurports
        to prioritize native experience, settler colonial studies in general tends
        towards an affective focus on the settler which pushes actual indigenous
        strugglestotheside(Snelgroveetal.,2014:10).Ontheonehand,Wolfe’s
        (2012) unified state dissolves the settler/native distinction along with set-
        tlercolonialism,leavingasidethequestionwhethersuchaflattenedinclu-
        sivity is necessarily just considering the kind of historical injustice the
        Palestinians have experienced. Veracini (2013), on the other hand, leaves
        his main discussion of indigeneity to the failure of Israelis to indigenize,
        employingindigenousasameredescriptivecategoryinthecontextofthe
        Palestinians. The indigeneity framework, to quote Amal Jamal (2011: 5),
        is ‘particularly pertinent for Palestinian citizens of Israel because it

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      110                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      providesavocabularybeyondconventionalliberalcitizenshiprightswith
      whichtheycanarticulatetheirdemands’.Thesepoliticalresonancescred-
      ibly explain the ease with which Palestinians inside Israel have taken up
      the settler colonial frame. What, however, may the settler colonial para-
      digm and an indigenous rights platform offer in the context of ongoing
      colonial occupation in the West Bank, and in the context of constant
      siege in the Gaza Strip? These are, of course, questions yet to be
      answered, and better answered by Palestinians themselves.
      Nevertheless,withoutseriousengagementwithsuchquestions,thesettler
      colonial paradigm not only risks turning ‘native’ into an affective cat-
      egory emptied of wider political content, but once again redrawing the
      Green Line between Palestinian citizens of Israel and those in the
      territories.                                           
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      In his assessment of the dire state of contemporary Palestinian politics,
      Hilal (2015: 360) yearns for ‘an investment in cultural and...social cap-
      ital, through informal and formal associations, the social media and
      cross-border interaction and collaborative efforts, to keep Palestine
      alive as a symbol of emancipation, freedom and justice’. As I have
      sought to show, the settler colonial paradigm may indeed be facilitating
      this:notonlydoesitprovideinternationalaudiencesafarmorereadable
      and cohesive frame with which to understand the conflict, but it comes
      with a built-in solidarity. Additionally, and most vitally, it promises to
      rejuvenate the Palestinian struggle under the prescriptive banner of
      decolonization, opening up new debates and alternatives outside of an
      evidently failing two-state paradigm. Yet, as I have also argued, this is
      where themost strident limitations ofthe settler colonial paradigm para-
      doxically come into view, due to, at best, under-developed reflection
      on the possibilities and practicalities of decolonization and, at worst,
      connotations deriving from its contextual point of origin flattening
      out important local historical and socio-political specificities. I highlight
      these limitations not to challenge the paradigm’s applicability to
      Israel-Palestine, but to appeal for greater rigour and attentiveness to
      particularity. I have sought to gesture towards some of these particula-
      rities–namely,theroleofnationalismandthepeculiarresonancesofthe
      settler/native distinction.                            
        By way of conclusion, however, I would like to point towards the
      challenges of the settler colonial paradigm’s insistence on an ontology
      of absolute polarity of settler and native for the types of political mobil-
      izations and struggles it could inaugurate. To be sure, there are immense
      difficulties in reckoning with heterogeneity in seemingly permanent
      structures of settler colonialism which all too easily assimilate nuance
      into legitimation; these difficulties are only amplified in the context of
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    111     
                                                             
        long-term intractable conflict like that in Israel-Palestine. Yet, as Joyce
        Dalsheim (2013) has argued in the context of Israeli settlers, the
        entrenchmentofpolarizeddiscoursemeansthatweoftenmissalternative
        modelsofpoliticalcommunitythatmaybetterservetheprojectofdecol-
        onization. It would certainly be a shame for the paradigm’s inconsisten-
        cies regarding a decolonization effectively rendered impossible to stand
        againstitsbroaderresonance,justasitwouldthedisciplinarydimensions
        of the settler colonial ontology to shut down debate – or, indeed, joint
        mobilization – between those broadly on the same page concerning
        Palestine. In his work on joint Arab-Jewish activism, Marcelo Svirsky
        (2014: 328) maintains that what settler colonial studies needs ‘is a cor-
        rective ontology and an affective change of heart’. I thus end with the
        caution that without this affective change in heart the settler colonial
        paradigm may continue to facilitate transnational solidarity and inter-
        nationalsympathy,butmayultimatelyfailtoextendbeyondapoliticsof
        moral outrage.                                       
                                                             
        Acknowledgements                                     
        My sincere appreciation goes to the four reviewers and editors at Theory, Culture and
        Society, who provided me with incredibly helpful and insightful feedback. Peter
        Chambers and Jillian Kestler-D’Amours read earlier versions of this article and I am
        very grateful for their comments. Raul Sanchez Urribari has offered me invaluable cri-
        tiqueandencouragement sinceitsveryfirst permutation. 
                                                             
        Notes                                                
                                                             
        1. Atthetimeofwriting,(February2016),thejournalhadpublished74articles
          citing Israel-Palestine, compared to 147 citing the United States, 122
          Australia, 108 Canada and 59 New Zealand.          
        2. ItisperhapsforthisreasonthatapartheidSouthAfricafeaturesrathertenu-
          ously in this literature. As Moshe Machover (2004) has argued, while there
          are evident similarities between the South African apartheid regime and
          the contemporary Israeli one, the key difference between the two is that the
          exploitation of black labor was key to propping up the former, whereas the
          acquisition of territory to create an exclusively Jewish society is the primary
          motivation of the latter.                          
        3. See: http://zochrot.org/en                        
        4. It is pertinent to note that much settler colonial scholarship on Israel-
          Palestine is avowedly anti-nationalist. Collins (2011: 115), for instance,
          appeals for a decolonization project in Israel-Palestine framed around the
          development of an anti-nationalist, anti-capitalist and anti-environmental
          destruction ‘Fourth World’ indigenous consciousness – which is well and
          good, but would seem to reduce both the specificity and profound territori-
          ality of the Palestinian struggle.                 
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      112                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      References                                             
      Abdo N and Yuval-Davis N (1995) Palestine, Israel and the Zionist settler
        project. In: Stasiulis D and Yuval-Davis N (eds) Unsettling settler societies:
        Articulationsofgender,race,ethnicityandclass.London:SAGE,pp.291–322.
      AbuEl-HajN(2003)ReflectionsonarchaeologyandIsraelisettler-nationhood.
        Radical History Review 86: 149–163.                  
      Akenson DH (1992) God’s Peoples: Covenant and Land in South Africa, Israel
        and Ulster. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.    
      BashirB(2015)Oncitizenshipandcitizenshipeducation:ALevantineapproach
        and reimagining Israel/Palestine. Citizenship Studies 19(6–7): 802–819.
      BenfordRDandSnowDA(2000)Framingprocessesandsocialmovements:An
        overview and assessment. Annual Review of Sociology 26: 611–639.
      BoberA(1972)TheOtherIsrael:TheRadicalCaseAgainstZionism.NewYork:
        Doubleday Anchor.                                    
      BrullM(2014)Ataleoftwosettlercolonies.Overland217.Availableat:https://
        overland.org.au/previous-issues/issue-217/feature-michael-brull/ (accessed
        June 2015).                                          
      Cavanagh E and Veracini L (2013) Editors’ statement, Settler Colonial Studies
        3(1): 1.                                             
      Collins J (2011) Global Palestine. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Curthoys A (1999) An uneasy conversation: Multicultural and indigenous dis-
        courses. In: Hage G and Couch R (eds) The Future of Australian
        Multiculturalism. Sydney: The University of Sydney Press, pp. 277–93.
      Dalsheim J (2013) Anachronism and morality: Israeli settlement, Palestinian
        nationalism, and human liberation. Theory, Culture & Society 30(3): 29–60.
      Ehrlich A (1987) Israel: Conflict, war and social change. In: Crighton C and
        Shaw M (eds) The Sociology of War and Peace. London: Macmillan,
        pp. 121–142.                                         
      Fanon F (1967) The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Farrington C. London:
        Penguin.                                             
      Farid F (2010) Terror at the beach: Arab bodies and the somatic violence of
        white cartographic anxietyin Australia and Palestine/Israel. Social Semiotics
        19(1): 59–78.                                        
      FarisH(ed.)(2013)TheFailureoftheTwo-StateSolution:TheProspectsofOne
        State in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. New York: IB Tauris.
      Farsakh L (2011) The one-state solution and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict:
        Palestinian challenges and prospects. Middle East Journal 65(1): 55–71.
      FinkelsteinN(2003)ImageandRealityoftheIsrael-PalestineConflict,2ndedn.
        London: Verso.                                       
      Gordon N and Ram M (2016) Ethnic cleansing and the formation of settler
        colonial geographies. Political Geography 53: 20–29. 
      HageG(2014)Alter-Politics:CriticalAnthropologyandtheRadicalImagination.
        Carlton: Melbourne University Press.                 
      Halper J (2015) War Against the People: Israel, the Palestinians and Global
        Pacification. London: Pluto Press.                   
      Hilal J (1976) Imperialism and settler colonialism in West Asia: Israel and the
        Arab Palestinian struggle. Utafi 1(1): 51–70.        

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    113     
                                                             
        Hilal J (2015) Rethinking Palestine: Settler-colonialism, neo-liberalism and the
         individualism in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Contemporary Arab Affairs
         8(3): 351–362.                                      
        Jamal A(2011)Arab MinorityNationalism in Israel:The Politics ofIndigeneity.
         New York: Routledge.                                
        KimmerlingB(1983)ZionismandTerritory:TheSocio-territorialDimensionsof
         Zionist Politics. Berkeley: University of California Press.
        KimmerlingB(2005)TheInventionandDeclineofIsraeliness:State,Societyand
         the Military. Berkeley: University of California Press.
        KohnMandMcBrideK(2011)PoliticalTheoriesofDecolonization:Postcolonialism
         and the Problem of Foundations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
        Krebs M and Olwan DM (2013) ‘From Jerusalem to the Grand River, our
         struggles are one’: Challenging Canadian and Israeli settler colonialism.
         Settler Colonial Studies 2(2): 138–164.             
        LazaroffT(2014)Bennett:We’llannexAreaCandofferthePalestiniansauton-
         omy on steroids. Jerusalem Post, 29 April. Available at: http://www.jpost.
         com/Diplomacy-and-Politics/Bennett-Well-annex-Area-C-and-offer-the-
         Palestinians-autonomy-on-steroids-350790 (accessed June 2015).
        Lloyd D (2012) Settler colonialism and the state of exception: The example of
         Palestine/Israel. Settler Colonial Studies 2(1): 59–80.
        Lloyd D and Pulido L (2010) In the long shadow of the settler: On Israeli and
         US colonialisms. American Quarterly 62(4): 795–809. 
        LubinA(2008)‘WeareallIsraelis’:Thepoliticsofcolonialcomparisons.South
         Atlantic Quarterly 107(4): 671–690.                 
        Lustick I (2013) Two-state illusion. The New York Times, 14 September.
         Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/15/opinion/sunday/two-state-
         illusion.html (accessed June 2015).                 
        Lustick I (2015) Making sense of the Nakba: Ari Shavit, Baruch Marzel, and
         Zionist claims to territory. Journal of Palestine Studies 44(2). Available at:
         http://www.palestine-studies.org/jps/fulltext/188325 (accessed January 2016).
        Machover M (2004) Is it apartheid?, 10 November. Available at: https://www.
         marxists.org/history/etol/writers/machover/2004/11/apartheid.html (accessed
         24 August 2016).                                    
        Macoun A and Strakosch E (2013) The ethical demands of settler colonial
         theory. Settler Colonial Studies 3(3–4): 426–443.   
        Merlan F (1997) Reply to Patrick Wolfe. Social Analysis 41(2): 10–19.
        Merlan F (2009) Indigeneity: Global and local. Current Anthropology 50(3):
         303–333.                                            
        Merry SE (2006) Transnational human rights and local activism: Mapping the
         middle. American Anthropologist 108(1): 38–51.      
        Mikdashi M (2013) What is settler colonialism? (for Leo Delano Ames Jr.).
         American Indian Culture and Research Journal 37(2): 23–34.
        Morgensen SL (2012) Queer settler colonialism in Canada and Israel:
         Articulating two-spirit and Palestinian queer critiques. Settler Colonial
         Studies 2(2): 167–190.                              
        Morris B (1988) The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem, 1947–1949.
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.              

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      114                           Theory, Culture & Society 35(1)
                                                             
      Nasasra M (2012) The ongoing Judaisation of the Naqab and the struggle for
        recognisingtheindigenousrightsoftheArabBedouinpeople.SettlerColonial
        Studies 2(1): 81–107.                                
      PappeI(1992)TheMakingoftheArab-IsraeliConflict,1947–1951.London:I.B.
        Tauris.                                              
      Pappe I (2008) Zionism as colonialism: A comparative view of diluted coloni-
        alism in Asia and Africa. South Atlantic Quarterly 107(4): 611–633.
      Pappe I (2012) Shtetel colonialism: First and last impressions of indigeneity by
        colonized colonizers. Settler Colonial Studies 2(1): 39–58.
      Pappe I (2013) Revisiting 1967: The false paradigm of peace, partition and
        parity. Settler Colonial Studies 3(3–4): 341–351.    
      PappeI(2015)TheframingofthequestionofPalestinebytheearlyPalestinian
        press: Zionist settler-colonialism and the newspaper Filastin, 1912–1922.
        Journal of Holy Land and Palestine Studies 14(1): 59–81.
      Pappe I and Chomsky N (2015) On Palestine. Chicago: Haywire Books.
      PiterbergG(2013)DeconstructingtheZionistsettlernarrativeandconstructing
        an alternative. In: Faris H (ed.) The Failure of the Two-State Solution: The
        Prospects of One State in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. New York: IB
        Tauris, pp. 113–129.                                 
      Pitka¨nenP(2014)AncientIsraelandsettlercolonialism.SettlerColonialStudies
        4(1): 64–81.                                         
      Ram U (1993) The colonization perspective in Israeli sociology: Internal and
        external comparisons. Journal of Historical Sociology 6(3): 327–350.
      RodinsonM(1973)Israel:AColonial-SettlerState?,trans.ThorstatD.London:
        Pathfinder Press.                                    
      Rose J (2005) The Question of Zion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Rouhana N and Sabbagh-Khoury A (2014) Settler-colonial citizenship:
        Conceptualizing the relationship between Israel and its Palestinian citizens.
        Settler Colonial Studies 5(3): 205–225.              
      Rowse T (2014) Indigenous heterogeneity. Australian Historical Studies 45(3):
        297–310.                                             
      SahharM(2015)Anallianceofforgetting:Nationalnarrativesoflegitimacyon
        theoccasionofIsrael-Australia’sjointstampissuecommemoratingtheBattle
        of Beersheba. In: Burla S and Lawrence D (eds) Australia and Israel: A
        Diasporic, Cultural and Political Relationship. Eastbourne: Sussex
        University Press, pp. 175–191.                       
      Said EW (1979) The Question of Palestine. London: Routledge.
      SalaitaS(2006)TheHolyLandinTransit:ColonialismandtheQuestforCanan.
        New York: Syracuse University Press.                 
      Salamanca OJ, Qato M, Rabie K and Samour S (2012) Past is present: Settler
        colonialism in Palestine. Settler Colonial Studies 2(1): 1–8.
      Sa´nchezRandPitaB(2014)Rethinkingsettlercolonialism.AmericanQuarterly
        66(4): 1039–1055.                                    
      SayeghF(2012)ZionistcolonialisminPalestine(1965).SettlerColonialStudies
        2(1): 206–225.                                       
      Shafir G (1989) Land, Labor, and the Origins of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
        1882–1914. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.    

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Busbridge                                    115     
                                                             
        Snelgrove C,Dhamoon RKand Corntassel J (2014) Unsettling settler colonial-
         ism: The discourse and politics of settlers, and solidarity with indigenous
         nations. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 3(2): 1–32.
        Snow DA and Benford RD (1988) Ideology, frame resonance and participant
         mobilization. International Social Movement Research 1(1): 197–217.
        Svirsky M (2014) The collaborative struggle and the impermeability of settler
         colonialism. Settler Colonial Studies 4(4): 327–333.
        Todorova T (2015) Reframing bi-nationalism in Israel-Palestine as a process of
         settler decolonization. Antipode 47(5): 1367–1387.  
        Veracini L (2003) The evolution of historical redescription in Israel and
         Australia: The question of the ‘founding violence’. Australian Historical
         Studies 34(122): 326–345.                           
        VeraciniL(2007)Settlercolonialismanddecolonization.borderlandse-journal6(2).
        VeraciniL(2010)SettlerColonialism:ATheoreticalOverview.London:Palgrave
         Macmillan.                                          
        Veracini L (2011) Introducing. Settler Colonial Studies 1(1): 1–12.
        VeraciniL(2013)Theothershift:Settlercolonialism,IsraelandtheOccupation.
         Journal of Palestine Studies 42(2): 26–42.          
        Veracini L (2014) Defending settler colonial studies. Australian Historical
         Studies 45(3): 311–316.                             
        Waziyatawin (2012) Malice enough in their hearts and courage enough in ours:
         Reflections on US indigenous and Palestinian experiences under occupation.
         Settler Colonial Studies 2(1): 172–189.             
        Wolfe P (1994) Nation and miscegeNation: Discursive continuity in the post-
         Mabo era. Social Analysis 36: 93–152.               
        Wolfe P (1999) Settler Colonialism and the Transformation of Anthropology:
         The Politics and Poetics of an Ethnographic Event. London: Cassel.
        Wolfe P (2006) Settler colonialism and the elimination of the native. Journal of
         Genocide Research 8(4): 387–409.                    
        WolfeP(2011)Raceandthetraceofhistory:ForHenryReynolds.In:Bateman
         F and Pilkington L (eds) Studies in Settler Colonialism: Politics, Identity and
         Culture. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 272–298.   
        WolfeP(2012)NewJewsforold:Settlerstateformationandtheimpossibilityof
         Zionism: In memory of Edward W. Said. Arena Journal 37/38: 285–321.
        Wolfe P (2013a) Introduction: Recuperating binarism: A heretical approach.
         Settler Colonial Studies 3(3–4): 257–279.           
        WolfeP(2013b)Thesettlercomplex:Anintroduction.AmericanIndianCulture
         and Research Journal 37(2): 1–22.                   
        Rachel Busbridge is an Honorary Research Associate of the Thesis Eleven
        CentreforCulturalSociology,LaTrobeUniversity,Melbourne,Australia.
        Previously she was an Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Research
        Fellow at the Institut fu¨r Islamwissenschaft, Freie Universita¨t Berlin,
        Germany. She is the author of Multicultural Politics of Recognition and
        Postcolonial Citizenship: Rethinking the Nation (Routledge, forthcoming
        2017).                                               