[PAGE 1]
 1304718                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764241304718Theory, Culture & SocietyCai
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       The Cultural Politics of               2025, Vol. 42(3) 21 –40
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Artificial Intelligence in China                      
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462442143130044771188
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Qiaoyu Cai                                            
       University of California, Santa Barbara               
       Abstract                                              
       This essay examines the cultural politics of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in China through
       the lens of postsocialism, proposing the concept of a ‘postsocialist AI’ that goes beyond
       the dominant paradigm of neoliberal informationalism. The essay first explores the
       distinct state-capital nexus in China’s AI development, characterized by paradoxical
       modes of operation driven by neoliberal motivations, yet also deeply influenced by
       symbolic lexicons, value systems, and institutional structures rooted in Leninist-Maoist
       traditions. The complex interplay of state support, local governmental practices, and
       market investment showcases ongoing negotiations among contradictory political-
       economic objectives and subject positions that resist simplification into a globally
       universalized model of neoliberal capitalism. Further, the essay investigates the
       ontogenesis or sociogenesis of machine learning – the process through which intelligent
       machines become socialized through interactions with their sociocultural and political
       contexts. By foregrounding the interactive encounter between distinct modes of
       machinic intelligence and Chinese modernity experiences, the essay contests the
       prevailing neoliberal subjectivity in AI studies and seeks to expand the political horizon
       limited by the hegemonic figure of homo economicus.   
       Keywords                                              
       artificial intelligence (AI), Chinese postsocialism, City Brain, homo economicus, homo
       politicus, machine learning, smart city, smart urbanism
                                                             
                                                             
       Alibaba’s City Brain AI has now entered its third phase of upgrades, featuring seamless
       integration of diverse data streams into a unified urban management system, encompass-
       ing key aspects of urban life such as traffic management, civic governance, healthcare,
       public security, and environmental monitoring. Leveraging big data analytics and deep
       learning models, City Brain 3.0 touts its capability for precise prediction of emerging
       patterns and trends, enabling real-time decision-making for crisis prevention and
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Qiaoyu Cai. Email: qcai@ucsb.edu
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      anticipatory governance.1 Following its initial success in Alibaba’s home city of
      Hangzhou, the platform has since been rolled out to 23 Chinese cities and has gone inter-
      national, with implementations in cities such as Kuala Lumpur and Dubai. Joining the
      foray are other home-grown tech giants, collectively known as BATH (Baidu, Alibaba,
      Tencent, Huawei), along with thousands of smaller enterprises from unicorns to low-
      capital start-ups, all contributing to the expansion of smart urbanism as a national
      endeavor now underway in over 500 Chinese cities.2 Aligned with the official policy
      documents, such as the State Council’s ‘14th Five-Year Plan’, these smart urbanism pro-
      jects set agendas around normative commitments to civic engagement, public service,
      community building, anchored around the key phrase – ‘grassroots engagement’.3 The
      term ‘grassroots’ rarely appears in the ‘smart city’ discourse in the West, where similar
      commitments to civic engagement are often framed within liberal ideals of civil liberties,
      emphasizing rights to free mobility, legal protection, and democratic participation.
      ‘Grassroots’, in the Chinese context, instead underscores a community-based and collec-
      tive-oriented approach resonating with the Maoist ethos of grassroots movements and
      ‘mass line’ policies. The persistant inclusion of the term ‘grassroots’ in both policy docu-
      ments and corporate whitepapers demonstrates a lineage of socialist legacies that con-
      tinue to bear on contemporary Chinese policy-making.   
        The actual implementation of smart urbanism, however, much like other grand state-
      sponsored initiatives in China, exhibits strong features of a neoliberal growth model. The
      market-driven approach to building the City Brain ecosystem puts smaller tech enter-
      prises under financial pressure to secure funds and loans, required to compete with major
      players like BATH for government contracts. This leads to an over-concentration of capi-
      tal in high-return areas such as cloud computing, cloud storage rentals, and platform
      building, while investment in the common good and community building, such as intel-
      ligent public service and smart government infrastructure, remains limited. However,
      unlike the predominance of private capital in Western ‘smart city’ projects, where urban
      development is driven by intense financial speculation and profit-making motives,
      China’s City Brain AI maintains a significant share of public sector capital investment
      through state-owned and public-owned enterprises. For instance, Hikvision, a leading
      provider of surveillance cameras, is over 40% state-owned.4 This blend of public and
      private shareholding is further shaped by the leading role of provincial and sub-provin-
      cial governments, which retain control over the specific directives of City Brain projects
      based on local social and economic needs, with tech firms serving primarily as technical
      implementers. This results in a distinct dynamic in which the government holds consid-
      erable leverage over corporations, contrasting with the corporate-dominated landscape
      of Western smart cities. Overall, China’s City Brain AI displays a strong synergy between
      public and private sectors that goes beyond simple capital-driven interests.
        What does the dynamic between governmental steering and market orientation reveal
      about the distinct nature of Chinese AI development? While neoliberalism as a socioeco-
      nomic and political framework both discursively defines and practically orients AI
      development in the West, which frameworks can account for the paradox in China
      between a strong discursive commitment to communist ideals of grassroots engagement
      and community building, and the relentless pursuit of market-defined goals that signifi-
      cantly deviate from those ideals in practice? Are there more nuanced frameworks that

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            23     
                                                             
       better explain the specific dynamics of Chinese AI development, which only partially
       align with neoliberalism, beyond simplistic labels such as ‘state capitalism’ or ‘neoliber-
       alism with Chinese characteristics’? How does this distinct dynamic make a difference
       in the creation and application of AI as both an epistemological and technical apparatus
       or dispositif?5                                       
        Artificial Intelligence (AI) is now couched in phrases such as ‘AI race’ and ‘AI
       Cold War’, most often describing an emerging conjuncture of contestation between
       the United States and China. As modernity is envisaged in the dominant form of neo-
       liberal globalization, it is not surprising that the two nations have galloped into a race
       for the next critical juncture of capital accumulation. Within the horizon of the current
       computational methods, what is conceived as the ‘General AI’ – the supreme fantasy-
       form of AI-based capital growth – is de facto a jigsaw puzzle, consisting of many
       task-specific AIs such as autopilot AI, medical AI, urban AI, and (the most hyped)
       Chatbot AI. For state apparatus, they are recruited to transform governmental, pro-
       ductive, and military capacities. In 2017, the State Council of China unveiled a
       national AI development plan, outlining a three-fold objective as the frontier of devel-
       opment: to promote and widely apply AI-directed and enhanced social services, pub-
       lic security, and national defense; to attain global leadership in AI theoretical
       innovation; to complete the digitized transition of the nation’s daily economic activi-
       ties.6 Considered generally, these objectives are governmental, geopolitical, and eco-
       nomic in nature. Obscured, however, is the political dimension – that is, what these
       developments mean for the nation’s political future. The plan outlines an AI-driven
       modernity that perpetuates the Chinese state’s developmentalist and depoliticized
       tendencies. It is developmentalist because the plan defines its supreme imperatives as
       ascending the global value chain and transforming the economy from low-end manu-
       facturing to sectors with higher added value; it is depoliticized as the plan lacks a
       clear political vision that guides the telos of such development. Despite containing
       extensive clusters of policy guidelines, development agendas, and evaluation metrics,
       the plan leaves a remarkable lacuna by not addressing any explicit political subject-
       position capable of contemplating the fate of the wildly detoured socialist republic.
       There is no discussion on how such AI integration could tackle pressing issues that
       are consequences of the four decades of reform – to name just a few, radical income
       inequality, labor abuse, ecological crises, and a tightly constrained, consumerism-
       rinsed public sphere. ‘Whither China?’ – a political question foundational to the legit-
       imacy of the People’s Republic – is continually deferred at the crossroads of the
       eagerly anticipated ‘AI revolution’.                  
        The retreat of the political horizon, as many leftists in both China and the West argue,
       is an inevitable result of unreflective developmentalism. Indeed, depoliticization and
       developmentalism are entwined features of capitalist modernity; the false dichotomy that
       seeks to separate economy from politics serves to mask the power-hungry nature of capi-
       tal (Hall, 1988; Wood, 1981). Post-1960s, the era hinges on economic performance as the
       supreme benchmark for political success, characterized by relentless pursuits of capital
       accumulation that justify intensifying social inequities, labor abuses, natural depriva-
       tions, and geopolitical tensions as necessary transitional sacrifices. The discourse of the
       ‘AI race’ has arisen within this global context of depoliticized developmentalism.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      24                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
        In this essay, my central purpose is to re-politicize the discourse on AI by examining
      the underlying historical consciousness and collective subjectivities that, although mar-
      ginalized in the era of depoliticized developmentalism, are decisive in shaping the
      dynamics of AI development across different national and social contexts. The kind of
      re-politicization I advocate for begins with an exploration of the cultural politics of AI.
      Here, ‘cultural’ does not refer to techno-cultural essentialism (such as ‘Confucian AI’) or
      niche-culture aesthetics (such as ‘Cyberpunk Martial Art’). Instead, it serves as a provi-
      sional placeholder for a radical type of historical consciousness and the politics of the
      collective, manifest through the discourse and praxis of AI development within specific
      political and socio-historical contexts. By foregrounding the cultural dimension of re-
      politicization, my goal is to move beyond the frameworks of institutional studies and
      policy analysis to address the larger problematic of historical consciousness and collec-
      tive subjectivity, which underpins the distinct dynamics of AI development.
        I choose China as the case study for AI cultural politics for two reasons. First, the
      nation’s proactive engagement and massive investment in the global ‘AI revolution’ have
      significant impact on the affordance of an AI-piloted future. Second, contemporary
      China bears the imprints of convoluted political experiences and social history in modern
      times; Chinese modernity is deeply intertwined with, yet remains distinct from, liberal
      modernity in the West. This makes China’s AI development a valuable case study for
      comparison with the prevailing focus in current AI research, which often assumes an
      implied subject-position rooted in the historical experiences of liberal modernity. Current
      discussion of AI politics, ethics, and aesthetics, within and (to a lesser extent) beyond
      Western academia, often revolves around a limited set of parameters such as the political
      form of constitutional democracy, the political economy of neoliberalism, and historical
      legacies of colonialism and imperialism. This preordained focus restricts insights into
      alternative subject-positions shaped by non-liberal, non-Western cultural and political
      histories that underpin distinct priorities and demands of AI development. Consequently,
      there is a noticeable shortage of scholarship investigating the origins and evolutions of
      AI, along with their sociopolitical implications, outside the scope of liberal modernity.
      The lack of alternative perspectives has depoliticizing effects, as it tends to suppress the
      historical and cultural consciousness from which the liberal subject itself emerged. The
      central aim of exploring the cultural politics of AI in China is to uncover the unique,
      historically and politically situated conditions that underlie alternative configurations of
      information modernity. By doing so, it lays the foundation for a re-politicized considera-
      tion of AI development.                                
        Presently, Western narratives on China’s AI development focus on its role in augment-
      ing the state’s capacity for social control, as well as its ambitions for global hegemony.
      Many in the West view post-reform China as de facto a capitalist regime with a market-
      driven economy, despite being politically out of step with its authoritarian single-party
      system. While China’s political and economic landscape exhibits significant elements of
      neoliberal influence, it also retains strong Maoist legacies that shape its political lexicon,
      institutional structure, media discourse, and popular sentiment.7 These elements chal-
      lenge the prevailing discourse of global neoliberalism that categorizes China as merely a
      variant, often described as ‘authoritarian state capitalism’ or ‘neoliberalism with Chinese
      characteristics’.8                                     

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            25     
                                                             
        Instead of referring to neoliberalism as the main analytical framework, I employ post-
       socialism to contextualize the current state of cultural politics in China. I do so for three
       reasons. The first is that I am making a historical claim: the era of ‘high socialism’ still
       looms large in contemporary China’s institutional, educational, and moral discourse.
       This influence suggests a dominant discursive and symbolic order that provides a moral
       foundation for popular sovereignty, diverging from liberal humanism. Despite teeming
       contradictions within the country’s ‘actually existing socialism’, it is reasonable to argue
       that China’s meta-historical consciousness is anchored in a distinct ‘regime of truth’; its
       collective ‘political unconscious’ has a ‘narrative’ structure that is profoundly historical.9
       The second reason for referring to postsocialism is that I am making a descriptive claim:
       contemporary Chinese reality is, to use a Deleuzian term, a ‘resonance chamber’ that
       echoes and relays a bewildering complex of modes of production, modes of social gov-
       ernance, economic practices, and symbolic orders (Deleuze and Guattari, 2007: 344).
       Prior to the onset of the actual cultural politics in China, no framework could adequately
       capture the nuances of the country’s situation. Postsocialism, therefore, is a compromise
       term. However, it is a more apt framework than more popular alternatives like ‘capital-
       ism with Chinese characteristics’ or ‘state capitalism’, because it implies a commingling
       of various positions typical of ‘post-’ theoretical frameworks such as postmodernism,
       postcolonialism, and posthumanism. These positions recognize the dialectical interplay
       of historical continuities and ruptures within certain political and theoretical positions,
       seeking to transcend essentialist claims and simplistic dualism.10 The third reason that I
       speak of postsocialism is that I am making a theoretical claim – one that recognizes a
       historical position from which to critique the tunnel vision of neoliberal capitalist moder-
       nity. For those who view neoliberalism as a hegemonic symbolic order enforcing a uni-
       form political rationality globally, postsocialism offers an alternative discursive-political
       position with a distinct set of symbolic lexicons and political configurations that remain
       incongruous with the model of neoliberal homo economicus.
        Through a postsocialist lens, grounded in historical, descriptive, and theoretical con-
       siderations, I explore the cultural politics of AI in China on two levels: a cultural-politi-
       cal focus on the state-social dynamic and a technical focus on a key dimension of
       contemporary AI technique – the interactive logic of machine learning. This two-level
       approach aims to theorize what I term ‘postsocialist AI’, which goes beyond the domi-
       nant paradigms and discursive hegemony of neoliberal technological modernity. On the
       cultural-political level, I examine the historically informed state-capital nexus in China,
       focusing on their political and ideological underpinnings, modes of operation, and
       approaches to social governance that are central to the policy agenda concerning China’s
       AI development. In particular, I examine the nation’s decentralized power mechanism
       that underpins its approach to smart urbanism. This grants local authorities considerable
       autonomy to work alongside private actors, fostering environments of politically moti-
       vated, strategic partnerships necessary for long-term AI innovation and the consistent
       development of smart urban infrastructure. This complex interplay between state sup-
       port, local governmental practices, and market investment showcases paradoxical com-
       mitments to neoliberal motivations, as well as symbolic lexicons, value systems, and
       institutional structures shaped by Leninist-Maoist traditions. Consequently, the cultural
       politics of AI in China results from ongoing negotiations among contradictory

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      26                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      political-economic objectives and subject positions, which cannot be fully understood
      within the confines of globally universalized neoliberal modernity.
        On the technical level, my analysis emphasizes postsocialism as an alternative frame-
      work for understanding the socialization process of intelligent machines, also known as
      the ontogenesis or sociogenesis of machine learning.11 This investigation examines the
      reciprocal relationship between AI and its embedded sociocultural and political contexts,
      as machines ‘learn’ by internalizing and acting upon the collective consciousness and
      political subjectivity of their environment. Philosopher Gilbert Simondon (2013) refers to
      this interactive form of machinic intelligence as ‘technical mentality’, highlighting the
      agency and subjectivity machines exhibit in their interactions with the organic world.
      Following Simondon, some technology theorists suggest that the core of ‘technical men-
      tality’ is governed by the political horizon of homo economicus, the quintessential figure
      embodying the episteme of neoliberalism. Under this framework, machine intelligence
      inherits values and biases from the neoliberal episteme when forming its own epistemo-
      logical foundations. However, I explore the interactive formation of machine intelligence
      through the mediation between machinic agents and an epistemic figure shaped by post-
      socialist China’s modernity experience. My aim is to interpret the cultural politics of AI in
      China, rooted in the unique interaction between machinic subjectivity and postsocialist
      subjectivity, thereby challenging the dominance of homo economicus as the sole political
      horizon shaping machine intelligence.                  
      The State-Capital Nexus in AI Analysis                 
      It comes as no surprise that popular discourse in both China and the US acknowledges
      the necessity of direct state participation in AI development, given its status as one of the
      most capital-intensive projects at present, shaped explicitly by geopolitical interests and
      military priorities. This recognition marks a shift from the previous era of cyberlibertari-
      anism, when media pundits championed the ‘Californian ideology’ advocating for radi-
      cal privatization of tech industries and complete withdrawal of state intervention. Riding
      the high tides of the ‘end of history’ discourse in the early 1990s, cyberlibertarians coined
      the term ‘New Class’ to promote simulated, eclectic politics. This ideology aimed to
      alleviate rising class tensions, exacerbated by increasing income disparities due to a dec-
      ade of neoliberal reform, by promising a forthcoming, techno-fantastic realm known as
      ‘cyberspace’. In this utopian realm, equality appeared to be available to anyone with
      internet access. Beneath this façade of radical individual liberty, autonomy, and eco-
      nomic decentralization, however, was the state’s instrumental role in developing vital
      infrastructure such as nationwide fiber optic networks, subsidizing internet services, and
      realigning legal, political, and institutional apparatuses in support of an immaculate
      vision of cyber-sovereignty. The state’s role, crucial in supporting a nascent form of capi-
      tal accumulation, is essential to establishing and enforcing geopolitical advantages in the
      global value chain. Although cyberlibertarian discourse sought to obscure this state-cap-
      ital alliance, the current juncture of AI development highlights it: the depoliticized poli-
      tics of state-capital alliance, based on both market exploitation and what Nancy Fraser
      pinpoints as ‘non-market expropriation’, is central to the cultural politics of AI in both
      the US and China.12                                    
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            27     
                                                             
        The Chinese form of the state-capital alliance, however, is complicated by its norma-
       tive claim to a socialist justice. Maoist ideology continues to wield powerful influence,
       not only among party ideologues but also among venture capitalists, with some promi-
       nent entrepreneurs holding strong faith in Mao’s principles and socialist institutions
       (Marquis and Qiao, 2022). Contrary to portrayals of China’s political economy as an
       authoritarian variant of neoliberalism, Wang Hui (2009) astutely observes that neoliberal
       elements in China are politically motivated rather than rooted in an ideological faith in
       market autonomy or political liberalization. These neoliberal strategies were tactically
       adopted by the reform regime to establish a ‘coercive discursive formation and ideology’
       that supported ‘the decentralization of power, benefits, and the contract system’ (Wang,
       2009: 30–31). Unlike the ‘shock therapy’ undergone by former communist states in
       Eastern Europe and Latin America, China’s integration of neoliberal elements was more
       strategic than ideological; the political incentives for surviving its Leninist-Maoist insti-
       tutions amid the trends of global neoliberal marketization outweighed any hardline com-
       mitment to either socialism or capitalism. The drive to solidify the party-state’s legitimacy
       through economic competitiveness has led to the development of a highly decentralized
       power mechanism. Beginning with fiscal decentralization in the late 1970s, the mecha-
       nism now sets de facto standards for most national endeavors in China, fostering peer
       competition and spontaneous adjustments among local, provincial, and sub-provincial
       governments, as well as private actors.               
        The current state-capital nexus of AI development exemplifies this complex interplay
       of socialist legacies and neoliberal tactics, marked by centralized command and decen-
       tralized execution. Instead of being a monolithic entity exerting seamless control, the
       Chinese state acts as a convener, setting campaign guidelines, and an arbitrator to bal-
       ance interests among local stakeholders and preempt excessive competition (Zeng,
       2020). Local authorities retain significant discretion in resource coordination, forming
       institutional agreements with the private sector, including procurement, outsourcing, and
       public-private partnerships (Yang et al., 2020). These partnerships place strategic empha-
       ses on shared risks, long-term cooperation, and common goals between public and pri-
       vate entities.                                        
        Smart urbanism in China, for example, displays dynamic synergies among state,
       municipal, and corporate actors across multiple scales, with regionally varied policies
       (Hu and Zheng, 2021; Marvin et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2023). National standards and
       guidelines are established through collaboration among agencies such as the Ministry of
       Finance, the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Ministry of Industry and Information
       Technology, and the National Development and Reform Commission. However, local
       governments, in partnership with public and private firms, develop specific plans tai-
       lored to their reciprocal benefits. For example, key initiatives like big data infrastructures
       and open government data practices (Gao, 2016; Liu et al., 2015) receive state support as
       policy priorities, yet their implementation varies across different municipalities, each
       displaying complex power dynamics and different local priorities in coordination with
       technology firms.                                     
        In Shanghai, China’s most capital-concentrated zone, often set up as strategic state
       exemplar showcasing the most advanced development, the municipal government ben-
       efits from massive state funding and high tax revenue, granting it strong leverage over

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      private firms. In 2019, Shanghai’s municipal government rolled out 100 billion yuan to
      fund enterprises innovating core urban AI technologies and introduced 22 policy agen-
      das, with funding commitments, to attract top international talent for the purpose of set-
      ting up the Shanghai Municipal Big Data Center (Marvin et al., 2022). In contrast to the
      strong public shareholding in the case of Shanghai, the home city of Alibaba, Hangzhou,
      receives less direct state support and relies heavily on Alibaba Cloud’s ET City Brain for
      capital investments and the company’s own corporate vision for smart urbanization. To
      mitigate Alibaba’s corporate dominance, the Hangzhou City administration subcontracts
      key aspects of the City Brain system to various smaller tech firms, many with strong state
      ties or substantial public ownership shares (Caprotti and Liu, 2022). In fact, Alibaba
      itself has about 20% share owned by the state-owned enterprise China Investment
      Corporation, which acquired half of Yahoo’s former 40% stake in Alibaba in 2012.13 For
      another case of the City Brain AI in Beijing’s Haidian District, the big data center and
      grid management system were funded through private capital, but the infrastructure con-
      tractor, Zhongguancun Smart City Co. Ltd (ZSC), has a mixed ownership co-funded by
      the district government, China Unicom (SOE), and corporate giants like Alibaba and
      Baidu, along with several unicorn enterprises (Xu et al., 2024). ZSC thus serves as a key
      intermediary between governmental authority and commercial partners.
        For yet another case, Shijiazhuang, the capital city of Hebei Province, the provincial
      government lacks sufficient tax revenue, which limits its bargaining power with corpo-
      rate actors (Zhang et al., 2022). Consequently, Shijiazhuang’s municipal governance
      tends to adhere more strictly to the national agenda, sometimes at the cost of addressing
      local and district-specific social imperatives. Key infrastructure projects like Shijiazhuang
      Big Data Center, funded directly by state-owned enterprises, place pressure on municipal
      departments to conform to the state mandates, despite their better grasp of local issues
      and potential solutions. As a result, Shijiazhuang’s performance in key metrics of smart
      urbanism consistently ranks among the lowest of China’s smart cities.
        The great diversity within China’s smart urbanism initiatives is also due to their
      experimentalist nature, which continues the decades-long trajectory of economic and
      urban experimentation promoted and managed by the state since the reform era (Xu
      et al., 2024). Scott Lash observes that the empirical tendency of Chinese political econ-
      omy represents a counterpoint to the ‘set of a priori principles embedded in the
      “Washington Consensus”’ (Lash, 2012: 280). Its trial-and-error approach involves exper-
      imenting with new economic initiatives at the local judiciary level, refining them based
      on lessons learned, and then scaling them to the provincial or municipal level. This
      approach is clear in the current smart urbanism projects, where urban spaces are viewed
      as testbeds for new sets of technical, political, and social governance such as sustainabil-
      ity, climate change, energy and digital transitions.   
        Although Lash (2012: 280) attributes the empirical logic enabling such experimenta-
      tion to the Daoist tradition of Wu Wei – non-action or refusal to take action under a priori
      frameworks – it is equally viable to attribute this logic to the key political features of
      China’s socialist tradition. These include a robust and resourceful state and public sector,
      along with the continuity of its Leninist-Maoist institutional framework, both of which
      are crucial to ensuring that experimentation proceeds in a consistent and ordered manner.
      For instance, the Shenzhen smart urbanism project, called ‘Zhi Wang’ (Net Weaving),

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            29     
                                                             
       addresses data fragmentation across various government departments by integrating het-
       erogeneous data streams collected on a grid basis into a unified public information
       resource base. The project’s implementation relies on an orthodox Leninist-Maoist hier-
       archical governance model, which ensures a formal and clearly defined governmental
       structure capable of facilitating holistic operations and cross-departmental collaboration.
       This whole-of-government approach has enabled the establishment of the Shenzhen
       Municipal Government Management Service Control Center, which aggregates hun-
       dreds of millions of datasets from 63 municipal departments and 250,000 channels (Xie
       et al., 2024). Although these so-called ‘public data’ lack clear definitions regarding
       accountability and legalized constraints on government use, they are not directly acces-
       sible to private firms without stringent approval processes. Tech companies participating
       in building grids and data centers – in this case, Tencent Cloud – are not directly involved
       in data collection. Early on they provide technical expertise for repair and maintenance;
       as operations stabilize, data platforms operate independently from private enterprises,
       with all previously required data for testing and maintenance transferred to the govern-
       ment as the sole legitimate entity responsible for their storage and management. In this
       case, the private sector plays a technical role but cannot dictate the terms of experiments;
       the decision to enact or reverse a ‘state of exception’ thus remains a political one.
        Although some scholarship sets out to scrutinize the state-capital nexus of AI imple-
       mentation in the Chinese context with attention to its sociocultural landscape, these anal-
       yses often fall short by accepting the baseline assumption that Chinese political economy
       is merely a variant of capitalism, typically labeled as ‘East Asian developmental state
       capitalism’ (Huang and Tsai, 2022; Rolf and Schindler, 2023). A frequently cited aspect
       of this thesis is the residual influence of Confucianism, which underpins the notion of
       ‘Confucian capitalism’. One popular interpretation links Confucian ethics to Chinese
       ‘public data’ practices, suggesting the purportedly weaker resistance among Chinese
       netizens to data harvesting as a reflection of Confucian collectivism (Webb, n.d.). Such
       culturalist interpretations, symptomatic of the Orientalist trends in the study of Chinese
       high-tech development (‘techno-Orientalism’ as many call it), risk reinforcing stereo-
       types of cultural and political inertia throughout China’s civilizational history, poten-
       tially resurrecting the buried discourse of ‘Oriental despotism’ (Huang and Tsai, 2022).
        Describing the Chinese political economy as a variant of state capitalism is even less
       meaningful, as the proactive participation of the state in capital production, reproduction,
       and manipulation is characteristic of modern statecraft itself. State capitalism essentially
       refers to the general methods and bureaucratic techniques that states employ to manage
       capital-related activities – a practice common across neoliberal states like the US and the
       UK and communist regimes such as the Soviet Union and Maoist China. What distin-
       guishes postsocialist China is not the uniquely close bond between state machinery and
       capital but rather the efficiency and robustness of such machinery in directing capital
       towards planned economic targets – although this capacity has been significantly under-
       mined by foreign direct investment over the last two decades. Among the legacies of the
       communist revolution, the theory of vanguard party representation provides the moral
       and discursive foundation for the party-state’s stringent control over capital.
        An illustrative example of this theory’s discursive appeal is the frequent reference to
       ‘grassroots engagement’ in policy documents and corporate whitepapers, as mentioned

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      30                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      earlier in this essay. While political engagement is often framed within the liberal model
      of democratic participation, the concept of ‘grassroots’ in the Chinese context is closely
      tied to public oversight, regime embeddedness, and controlled participation – all pillar
      mechanisms of the Leninist-Maoist party-state structure (Papagianneas, 2023; Zhou,
      2022). According to the theory of vanguard party representation, the party-state must
      remain attuned to the masses for effective decision-making. Mao’s own slogan, ‘from the
      masses, to the masses’, means to gather opinions from ordinary people before synthesiz-
      ing them into a basis for policy-making. This theory of embeddedness deviates from the
      liberal model of participation, where direct citizen participation in decision-making is
      anticipated. The vanguard party theory, in contrast, places centralized control in the
      hands of the party-state and its core leadership, with the aim of ‘overseeing the overall
      situation and coordinating all parties’ (Chen et al., 2014: 4).
        The current AI-driven smart governance is envisioned to enhance the efficiency of over-
      sight, through processing billions of datapoints into fine-grained categories, thus enabling
      an unprecedented scale and efficiency of information collection, organization, and moni-
      toring. The party-state remains at the helm of the information loop, with the people staying
      passive in comparison. This dynamic is evident in China’s smart urbanism projects, where
      citizens are less actively involved in direct policy-making and the design of sociotechnical
      systems (STS), such as the types of service delivery, the deployment of transportation facil-
      ities, and the trajectories of data transmission. More often, municipal governments substi-
      tute massive data collection and synthesis for actual citizen input, assuming they understand
      what constitutes a ‘people-centered’ design. This leads to a ‘taken-for-granted’ view of citi-
      zenship that suggests strong civic stewardship and paternalism.
        Critiques of such modes of smart governance as un-democratic rightly pinpoint the
      Chinese government’s technocratic tendency to replace people with datasets, leading to
      increasingly ‘detached’ engagement with the general populace. Shoshana Zuboff’s con-
      cept of ‘surveillance capitalism’ has lent a critical framework to numerous discussions
      on China’s authoritarian use of digital surveillance infrastructure, driven by the impera-
      tives of social control and state security (Chan and Kwok, 2022; Lin and Milhaupt, 2023;
      Xu et al., 2024). Zuboff’s critique is cogent in her extensive analysis of how American
      tech firms’ appropriation of user data for commercial purposes has pioneered a new ‘eco-
      nomic order’ or ‘logic of accumulation’ that profits from users’ behavioral patterns –
      what she terms ‘behavioral surplus’ (Zuboff, 2019). The concept is central to this new
      epochal form of capitalism, as it identifies the distinct raw material for private appropria-
      tion. The mechanism through which data is extracted from consumers thus locates the
      central power dynamics within surveillance capitalism, hence its core contradiction
      between consumer autonomy and corporate power. Under surveillance capitalism, the
      means of production is ‘behavioral modification’ – modifying user behavior through
      customized digital products. The predominance of the private sector in Zuboff’s analysis
      is self-explanatory for its misalignment with the surveillance practice in the Chinese
      context. Unlike the dominance of private capital in the West, particularly in the US, the
      Chinese government’s unrelenting command over civilian data suggests a form of ‘sur-
      veillance statism’ rather than ‘surveillance capitalism’.
        As it is no secret that states of all kinds are proactive in surveillance, it is again neces-
      sary to situate China’s surveillance industry within its own dynamic of systemic

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            31     
                                                             
       integration between state power and private capital (Huang and Tsai, 2022). Zuboff’s
       discussion, centered on the liberal West, barely addresses Chinese tech firms or those in
       other parts of the globe where digital economy is less developed. Thus, the ‘age of sur-
       veillance capitalism’ framework is an epochal stage of capitalism understood from a
       ‘certain political, philosophical, and geographical position’ (Evangelista, 2019: 250).
       The ‘free individual’ – or more precisely, postindustrial consumers in the context of
       Zuboff’s analysis – cited as the moral foundation of data protection speaks to a liberal
       picture of human flourishing, which is not directly applicable to societies where moral
       frameworks emphasize collective values over individual liberty. The Chinese public
       sphere, partially steered by the party-state political parlance, for instance, emphasizes the
       collective notion of ‘the people’ as the legitimate foundation of political power. The
       Leninist-Maoist framework of controlled participation frames public engagement under
       the absolute authority of the party-state, which is presumed to embody and lead the inter-
       ests of the people to achieve common political and economic goals (Gueorguiev, 2021).
        In this sense, the ideological and organizational principles of Leninist-Maoist institu-
       tions are deeply embedded in China’s enthusiastic embrace of AI, as they optimize exist-
       ing political structures and practices for controlled inclusion. Yet, this embrace of AI and
       smart technologies risks exacerbating existing power imbalances, further blurring the
       line between effective governance and authoritarian overreach. The grassroots emphasis
       is often reduced to a process of harvesting billions of abstract data points for surveillance
       tracking. The Shenzhen ‘Net Weaving’ project, for example, does not simply centralize
       data for administrative efficiency; it transforms the very fabric of urban life into a mech-
       anism of government oversight, where citizens’ moves are categorized and monitored by
       an opaque bureaucratic apparatus. The lack of accountability mechanisms in managing
       ‘public data’ underscores the government’s unchecked power, raising ethical concerns
       about the pervasive reach of the state into the private lives of citizens, where surveillance
       is as much a tool of political control as it is a means of governance.
        In any case, a well-contextualized analysis of Chinese cultural politics must go beyond
       the simplistic lens of state capitalism to recognize the complex state-capital nexus shap-
       ing China’s AI practices. This nexus, manifest though the deep ambivalence of data gov-
       ernance – seeking to ‘keep in touch’ with the people through controlled feedback loops
       while simultaneously deepening authoritarian control – reflects a more fundamental con-
       tradiction within China’s social fabric. The nation is caught between two powerful and
       opposing forces: a persistent yearning for socialist justice and equality, rooted in its revo-
       lutionary past, and an equally strong drive for capital efficiency and national pride, which
       has become central to its contemporary identity. These conflicting imperatives create a
       tension within all aspects of China’s AI practices.   
       Interactive Computation and the ‘Epistemological      
       Dispositifs’ of AI                                    
       An effective framework for re-politicizing the cultural politics of AI should recognize
       society as the primary contact point where machine intelligence is socialized through
       interactions with collective subjectivities, rooted in specific historical, cultural, and
       political experiences. This is particularly true with the advent of deep learning-based
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      32                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      model pipelines and algorithmic designs. Unlike the top-down supervised programming,
      where machines ventriloquize the intentions of engineers, machine intelligence now
      emerges from a combination of supervised, self-supervised, and unsupervised training.
      This enables a contingent formation of machine intelligence unpredictable from its for-
      mally designed model pipelines and algorithms.         
        Contingency, in this context, refers to two main factors. First, as Fazi (2018) explains,
      the iterative nature of computation (a key architectural design in machine learning)
      means that the ‘truths’ produced by machines are truthful only in relation to the specific
      data and conditions within the system itself, making computational ‘truths’ inherently
      contingent. Second, contingency also arises from the unpredictability of the environment
      – the dynamic and unpredictable interactions between humans, machines, and the broader
      world that serve as raw material for machine learning. This unpredictability reflects the
      irreducible indeterminacy of the lifeworld itself. Thus, machine learning involves inter-
      preting and interacting with a world that is inherently dialogic and interactive. Both
      sources of contingency highlight the inherent agency of machine intelligence, which
      goes beyond simply following the intentions of engineers or serving the demands of
      techno-capital.                                        
        The recent turn to studying the cultural life of machine learning (Roberge and Castelle,
      2021) is a promising development in this regard. It approaches AI not as a collection of
      passive instruments relaying human intelligence but as a domain of reflexive, socialized
      agents. By paying close attention to the ‘end-to-end’ sociological contexts where machine
      intelligence interacts with and learns from the cultural environment, we can highlight
      AI’s role as more than just replicating human intentions. Rather, AI systems reimagine
      and rework external inputs, creating a quasi-independent political entity (Roberge and
      Castelle, 2021: 1). These intelligent agents develop distinct forms of epistemologies,
      generate knowledge of their own making, and even articulate ontological desires to
      engage with the world.14 In essence, contemporary AI driven by machine learning pro-
      vides ‘actionable knowledge’ that ‘is in and of itself a form of interested knowledge’,
      shaped by its interaction with the environment (Roberge and Castelle, 2021: 14).
        The unique epistemological and ontological aspects of machine intelligence can be
      understood in more radical terms. Drawing upon French logician Jean-Yves Girard’s
      theory of ‘ludic formalism’, Parisi (2021: 33–53) pushes the mode of interactive learning
      toward a radically contingent, spontaneous, and undirected form. ‘Ludic formalism’
      refers to a mode of computational logic that diverges from classical rule-based formal-
      isms. Instead of relying on discrete units and well-defined propositions, it emphasizes
      the ‘locativity of the sign’, where meaning and logic emerge through the interactions of
      signs within a system (2021: 45). This leads to a view of computational meaning and
      logic not as static truths but as dynamic, interactive processes – sign in action or code in
      functioning. This observation leads to a technical formulation of machine epistemology,
      or what Gilbert Simondon (2013: 1) calls ‘technical mentality’, a unique mode of knowl-
      edge that arises from the operational aspects of computational logic.
        A promising application of the ‘ludic formalism’ is its potential to challenge humanist
      dispositifs of power with an unpredictable and often incomprehensible kind of machine
      intelligence. Rooted in the universal concept of Man and its reification in the biocentric
      story of human sapience – as Wynter (2015) points out – the humanist dispositifs are

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            33     
                                                             
       recursively embedded in the formal structures and logic of contemporary algorithmic
       thought. Parisi (2021: 34) identifies two key sources of humanism that the ‘ludic formal-
       ism’ of machine intelligence can disrupt. One source is the ‘order of meaning subtending
       the imperial technology of colonial governance and racialized anti-blackness’, which
       Wynter refers to as the ‘universal cosmogony of Man’. This order of meaning is recur-
       sively encoded in modern secular knowledge and Western techno-science. As many tech-
       nology critics have noted, this regime of cognition, based on biological determinism and
       exclusionary constructs of race and gender, has been extended to establish the cognitive
       foundation of contemporary AI systems (Amaro, 2023; Apprich et al., 2018; Benjamin,
       2020; Chun and Barnett, 2021; Noble, 2018).           
        The other source of humanism emerged as an economic concept, shaped initially by
       Judeo-Christian alignment of human worth with economic productivity and later secu-
       larized as the concept of ‘human capital’ through liberalism and neoliberalism (Wynter,
       2003). Man has since become homo economicus – a figure that prioritizes economic
       calculations above all else, reducing the existential aspects of being human to capital
       accumulation. These two sources of humanism co-constitute the dominant humanist dis-
       positifs of power. ‘The logic of interactive computation’, as Parisi (2021: 38) argues,
       ‘may contribute to breaking the spell of the Promethean Man’.
        Parisi’s account, with its thick wrappings of historical and theological codes, high-
       lights a particular pedigree of humanism – the Western liberal form – upon which mod-
       ern techno-science systems are built. Through neoliberal globalization, homo economicus
       has metamorphosed into a cosmic telos, stifling the spontaneity of other humanist tradi-
       tions. A kind of universal Prometheanism permeates all techno-cultures, grounding their
       humanist epistemological dispositifs in Western mythologies. However, the Promethean
       myth is not an archetype that sponsors all forms of modernity or technological traditions.
       For example, Chinese technological modernity has its own mythological origins.15 While
       Chinese technological modernity has converged with universal Prometheanism due to
       global neoliberal influences, framing technological modernity solely within the lineage
       of liberal dispositifs of power fails to account for diverse technical traditions and techni-
       cal thinkings.                                        
        The development of algorithmic thought within the epistemological dispositifs of
       postsocialist China raises a distinct set of questions: How is interactive machine intelli-
       gence shaped in this context, and what impact does it have on China’s broader culture
       and sociopolitical landscapes? If the origin of Western technical thinking is rooted in the
       Promethean myth of progress, what distinct cosmologies inform the cultural technics of
       Chinese modernity? ‘Ludic formalism’ suggests that the interactive logic of machine
       intelligence can be understood as the ‘locativity of the sign’ – the interaction of movable
       signs within a specific ‘loci’. In the postsocialist Chinese context, how do these interac-
       tions of rules form a unique ‘loci’ specific to the syntactical movements of AI techno-
       signs (2021: 43–8)?                                   
       Homo economicus? Homo politicus postsocialismus?      
       A full-scale study of Chinese cultural technics – its origin and contemporary metamor-
       phosis vis-à-vis machinic agents – is beyond the scope of this essay. However, to begin
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      addressing the questions posed, it is useful to reiterate this critical assumption: postso-
      cialism is not merely an epochal socioeconomic condition but a cultural-political order
      embodying a dominant form of technological modernity. Postsocialist subjectivity is a
      sociopolitical figure characterized by both ruptures and continuities with the previous era
      of high communism; it is the core epistemic figure for postsocialism, analogous to homo
      economicus in the context of neoliberalism.            
        In Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution, Brown (2017) discusses
      the rise of neoliberalism in terms of its dominant political epistemology, pivoting on the
      transition from homo politicus – the politically conscious and judicious figure – to homo
      economicus – a figure that prioritizes economic calculation over political considerations.
      Several issues, however, can be contested regarding Brown’s portrayal of the Manichean
      struggle between homo politicus and homo economicus. I will highlight its narrow focus
      on the Western genesis and development of political epistemology. Brown starts by pre-
      senting homo politicus as an ontological fact tout court rather than a historical construct
      emerging in a specific context – namely, ancient Greece. The political epistemology
      represented by the figure has since influenced a wide spectrum of political traditions and
      political philosophies, but by and large these variants were regional developments before
      the spread of European colonialism and imperialism. By defining homo politicus as a
      primal and transhistorical figure without proper qualification, Brown risks promoting an
      epistemological imperialism. In this view, homo politicus as conceived by Aristotle (as
      zōon politikon, or the ‘political animal’) is seen as having a Western origin, later imposed
      on other cultures through colonial and imperial expansion. By this logic, other forms of
      political rationality are often viewed as mere offshoots of this original Western model,
      and those that do not fit the homo politicus paradigm are dismissed as apolitical.
        This explains why Brown analyzes homo politicus from multiple perspectives includ-
      ing social relations, language, law, and ethical philosophy, but omits technê, i.e. technical
      praxis, the historical and cultural practices of relating to the world through the use of
      technology. Technê (tekhne) is a key concept in Aristotle’s own evaluation of a good polit-
      ical life and a crucial link to his conception of the political ontology of human society.
        Discussing politics without technê leads to a lack of critical perspectives regarding the
      cultural-technical grounding of politics. In Hui’s (2016) words, ‘the unification of the
      cosmos and the moral through technical activities’ informs the ‘cosmotechnics’ of politi-
      cal epistemology. Rather than a single homo politicus at the beginning, there were diverse
      collectives of homos developing their own versions of politicus through historically spe-
      cific technical activities. In this process, homos was transformed by the politicus; ulti-
      mately, a historically distinct homo politicus underlies technê, shaping the
      cultural-technical grounding of political thinking. Thus, homo politicus can only exist in
      specific forms. As Chambers (2018: 722) notes, homo politicus should not be viewed as
      an abstract category but as specific forms such as ‘homo politicus athenikos, homo politi-
      cus republicanus, homo politicus liberalis, homo politicus democraticus, homo politikus
      communistus’. To these variations, I add my own coinage: homo politicus postsocialis-
      mus. The rise of neoliberalism cannot be understood simply as the suppression (or even
      replacement) of a purely political figure by a purely economically calculative figure. The
      supposed purity of each figure and the dualistic framework used to describe them only
      reaffirm the separation of politics and economy, reinforcing depoliticization by

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            35     
                                                             
       subsuming non-Western cultural-technical thinking and cultural-political perspectives
       within an all-encompassing horizon of the Western-style democratic homo politicus.
        The cultural politics of technology is thus essential for creating a discursive space
       where diverse forms of political figures can be considered in relation to their own mate-
       rial and symbolic histories. It is crucial to recognize these figures as viable and compet-
       ing articulations of political theories and subjectivities. Chinese postsocialism, for
       instance, represents an alternative set of cultural-political discourse and praxis that enact
       and utter a postsocialist subjectivity – one that is intertwined with, but not fully subsum-
       able by, the globally dominant neoliberal subjectivity. Understanding the development of
       AI in China entails an effort to interpret the interactive encounter between this postso-
       cialist subjectivity, situated at a yet undetermined historical conjuncture, and the techno-
       logic of machinic agents, channeling distinct epistemic implications and ontological
       potential to vary, adapt, and influence. The process is dialectical: the march of AI in
       postsocialist reality should be viewed as sociotechnical mediation and mutual articula-
       tion between these two subjectivities. This interaction leads to a new form of cultural
       politics, whose ‘actually existing’ interpellation of social relations and political subjec-
       tivities are beyond the existing parlance of political science and sociology.
        Returning to Parisi’s (2021: 35) account of a ‘racialized and gendered intelligence’
       enfolded in modern techno-science – ‘the epistemological descriptions of the human as the
       reinvention of homo œconomicus’ – it becomes evident that such a reinvented homo eco-
       nomicus implies epistemic hegemony similar to Brown’s idealistic account. Both Parisi
       and Brown assume that the global expansion of capital and market forces subsumes all of
       humanity into a highly homogenized form of neoliberal subjectivity, leading to a paradig-
       matic relationship between humans and technology – one where machines embody neolib-
       eral values. The ‘racialized and gendered intelligence’ within AI is thus based on Western
       conceptions of these terms, shaped by the West’s own modernity experiences.
        One example of the misaligned application of the notion of ‘race’ to China’s ethnic
       politics – prevalent in both academic and media discourse in the West – is the ‘politics of
       recognition’. In this view, the expansion of China’s surveillance state, particularly
       through the use of AI, is seen as deepening authoritarian control in ways akin to the sup-
       pressive practices of racial segregation, eugenics, and identity-based categorization in
       the West. Often, these critiques gloss over or simply overlook the local contexts and do
       not adequately consider how specific historical and cultural-political circumstances in
       China require alternative analytical categories and critical perspectives. Even the basic
       distinction between the Chinese notion of ‘ethnicity’, shaped by a prolonged history of
       multiethnic encounters, coexistence, and assimilation, and the Western notion of ‘race’,
       evolving through histories of colonization, segregation, and civil rights movements, is
       rarely acknowledged in their critical assumptions.    
        It is clear that the rise of ethnic tensions in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region
       has been accompanied and exacerbated by the expansion of the smart urbanism project,
       where widespread installations of surveillance cameras, hub grids, checkpoints, data
       doors and profile ranking systems harvest extensive datasets for algorithm-based ‘pre-
       ventive policing’ (Byler, 2022). However, explaining these ground-truths solely through
       Western frameworks such as Foucauldian panopticism, Deleuzian ‘society of control’ or
       the overlap of ‘the neoliberal and illiberal East’ (clearly a shortage of political

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      vocabularies here) is hardly revelatory of any local-specific power dynamics, due to
      China’s own civilizational and political history (Byler, 2022: 203, 211). A historically
      and politically conscious critique needs to consider China’s broader postsocialist transi-
      tion, where neoliberal marketization drives the displacement of socialist values of class-
      based equality, which once underpinned ethnic solidarity, in favor of capital-driven
      resource competition (Lin, 2013; Wang, 2010). While the prevalent use of algorithm-
      based tracking and pattern recognition exacerbates the deteriorating conditions of ethnic
      politics in China, the full implications of these practices cannot be accurately captured by
      analytical categories developed primarily for examining neoliberal subjectivity in the
      West. Instead, a more nuanced critique is required – one that acknowledges the role of
      surveillance in perpetuating state control while also understanding the specific historical
      and political contexts that shape its implementation in China.
        No doubt homo economicus is a primary epistemic figure shaping AI’s design due to
      the technology’s Western origins. As Chun and Barnett (2021: ix) note, ‘software’s emer-
      gence’ is ‘a vapory thing encapsulated in neoliberal dreams of programmability’. However,
      an unexamined application to China of biocentric categories central to Western modernity
      risks overlooking the material effects of AI as it interacts with local contexts. The chal-
      lenge lies in recognizing the entanglement between homo economicus and the techno-
      semiosis of a specific Chinese postsocialist reality. The first step is to de-fetishize homo
      economicus as an all-encompassing ontological and epistemological figure for all human-
      ity, thereby revealing ruptures, tensions, and contradictions that arise from the encounter
      between dominant neoliberal frameworks and local forces, power structures, and social
      histories. The study of AI cultural politics should consider a triad of perspectives: global
      neoliberalism, local material and symbolic traditions, and the ‘ludic’ intelligence of
      machines. Examining AI development in China requires neither objectifying AI nor
      objectifying China but attending to the interactive encounter between the ‘alien dimen-
      sion’ of algorithmic thought and a distinctly Chinese experience of modernity – both of
      which remain unassimilable to the global reproduction of neoliberal subjectivity.
      Acknowledgements                                       
      I would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers and the editors of Theory, Culture & Society
      for their insightful feedback and constructive comments. My deep gratitude goes to my mentor,
      Alan Liu, whose strong support and meticulous suggestions guided me through multiple revisions
      of this paper.                                         
      ORCID iD                                               
      Qiaoyu Cai https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5570-5919       
      Notes                                                  
      1. See Alibaba Cloud (2019): https://alibaba-cloud.medium.com/city-brain-now-in-23-cities-
        in-asia-5f047245839d.                                
      2. See: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/12/china-ai-technology-city/.
      3. Both official documents and the white paper on Alibaba City Brain underscore grassroots
        governance innovation (‘基层管理创新’). The model is divided into multi-level, cooperative
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            37     
                                                             
         systems at city and district levels, and further refined into ‘micro-brains’ at town or commu-
         nity levels. Community-level micro-brains target grassroots governance led by party build-
         ing, emphasizing grid management, emergency command, and public service. See Alibaba
         Research Institute, ‘City Brain 3.0 – Sustainable Future of Urban Collaboration’ (城市大
         脑3.0-城市大协同未来可持续), 25 Apr. 2023, https://dp.alibaba.com/exchange/article/293,
         and the China Electronics Standardization Institute, ‘City Brain Development White Paper
         (2022 Edition)’, 25 Apr. 2023, http://www.cesi.cn/202201/8200.html.
       4. See: https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/06/22/1054586/hikvision-worlds-biggest-sur
         veillance-company/.                                 
       5. Foucault defines ‘dispositifs’ as ‘a thoroughly heterogeneous ensemble consisting of dis-
         courses, institutions, architectural forms, regulatory decisions, laws, administrative measures,
         scientific statements, philosophical, moral and philanthropic propositions – in short, the said
         as much as the unsaid. Such are the elements of the apparatus. The apparatus itself is the
         system of relations that can be established between these elements.’ The term, translated in
         English as ‘apparatus’, underscores the intricate relationship between knowledge and power
         – the way in which power operates through the production, organization, and distribution of
         knowledge within a given society (Foucault, 1981: 194).
       6. State Council of China, ‘New Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan’, (新一
         代人工智能发展规划), 23 May 2024, http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/con-
         tent_5211996.htm.                                   
       7. For example, on popular platforms like Weibo, WeChat, and Xiaohongshu there are frequent
         complaints about income inequality, critiques of capital manipulation and exploitation, advo-
         cacy for marginalized and underserved populations, criticism of development practices insen-
         sitive to ecological protection. Many of these posts, whether ironically or sincerely, call for a
         return to ‘socialist justice’.                      
       8. David Harvey’s introduction of the phrase led to numerous debates regarding China’s reform
         as a purely authoritarian capitalism experiment. Nevertheless, he has substantially revised
         this position in his more recent work, The Anti-Capitalist Chronicle (2020).
       9. For many Chinese, the narrative, its ‘ideology of form’, can be summarized as a series of
         regime changes that led to significant shifts in economic conditions, political states, and cul-
         tural discourses. This includes the collapse of the Qing Empire, the short-lived interim of the
         liberal republic, the establishment of the revolutionary regime, the tumultuous Maoist period,
         and the swift shift into a post-ideological market society.
       10. See Jameson (2005), ‘The Four Maxims of Modernity’, in A Singular Modernity (2012),
         and ‘Conclusion: Secondary Elaborations’, in Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late
         Capitalism (2005).                                  
       11. Ontogenesis or sociogenesis of machine learning (ML) refers to the process through which
         ML-based AI systems develop their knowledge and cognitive capabilities by interacting with
         the social and cultural environment in which they are embedded. This concept views machine
         intelligence as an emergent phenomenon resulting from reciprocal interactions with the sur-
         rounding sociocultural and political context, rather than merely executing a predetermined set
         of programming instructions.                        
       12. As Nancy Fraser shows, capitalism’s ‘hidden abode’ of exploitation has a more fundamental
         ‘abode behind the abode’ of expropriation – the non-economic measure of political, institu-
         tional, and downright violent coercion to steal from and loot the downtrodden and subjugated
         people around the world. Expropriation reveals the true condition of capital’s primitive accu-
         mulation (Fraser, 2022: 14–23).                     
       13. See: ‘China fund may help Alibaba in Yahoo! Bid’: report (phys.org); http://phys.org/
         news/2012-05-china-fund-alibaba-yahoo.html.         

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      38                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      14. The ‘cultural turn’ underscores the agency of machines as a form of ‘epistemology and,
        increasingly, ontology, a way of knowing and being, a part of discourse and a mode of action’
        (Roberge and Castelle, 2021: 2).                     
      15. See Yuk Hui’s account of Chinese ancient mythology and its bearing on the original concep-
        tion of technics and the creation of a pantheistic worldview in China (Hui, 2016: 14–18).
      References                                             
      Alibaba Cloud (2019) City Brain Now in 23 Cities in Asia. In: Medium. Available at: https://
        alibaba-cloud.medium.com/city-brain-now-in-23-cities-in-asia-5f047245839d (accessed 23
        May 2024).                                           
      Amaro, Ramon (2023) The Black Technical Object: On Machine Learning and the Aspiration of
        Black Being (On the Antipolitical, Volume 2). London: Sternberg Press.
      Apprich, Clemens, Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong, Cramer, Florian, et al. (eds) (2018) Pattern
        Discrimination: In Search of Media. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
      Benjamin, Ruha (2020) Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code.
        Cambridge: Polity.                                   
      Brown, Wendy (2017) Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution. New York, NY:
        Zone Books.                                          
      Byler, Darren (2022) Terror Capitalism: Uyghur Dispossession and Masculinity in a Chinese
        City. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.             
      Caprotti, Federico and Liu, Dong (2022) Platform urbanism and the Chinese smart city: The co-
        production and territorialisation of Hangzhou City Brain. GeoJournal 87(3): 1559–1573.
      Chambers, Samuel A. (2018) Undoing neoliberalism: Homo Œconomicus, Homo Politicus, and
        the Zōon Politikon. Critical Inquiry 44(4): 706–732. 
      Chan, Ngai Keung and Kwok, Chi (2022) The politics of platform power in surveillance capi-
        talism: A comparative case study of ride-hailing platforms in China and the United States.
        Global Media and China 7(2): 131–150.                
      Chen, Yong, Li, Cheng and Li, Su (2014) Chengshi jiceng shehui zhili mianlin de xianshi tiaozhan
        he yingdui weidu 城市基层社会治理面临的现实挑战和应对维度 [On practical challenges
        and responses to city basic-level governance]. Beijing zhengfa zhiye xueyuan xuebao 北京政
        法职业学院学报  4:92–100.                                   
      China fund may help Alibaba in Yahoo! bid: report (2012) Available at: https://phys.org/
        news/2012-05-china-fund-alibaba-yahoo.html (accessed 23 May 2024).
      Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong and Barnett, Alex (2021) Discriminating Data: Correlation,
        Neighborhoods, and the New Politics of Recognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Crawford, Kate (2021) Atlas of AI: Power, Politics, and the Planetary Costs of Artificial
        Intelligence. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.  
      Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Félix (2007) A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia.
        Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.      
      Dirlik, Arif (1989) Postsocialism? Reflections on ‘socialism with Chinese characteristics’. Bulletin
        of Concerned Asian Scholars 21(1): 33–44.            
      Evangelista, Rafael (2019) Review of Shoshana Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism.
        Surveillance & Society 17(1–2): 246–251.             
      Fazi, M. Beatrice (2018) Contingent Computation: Abstraction, Experience, and Indeterminacy in
        Computational Aesthetics. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
      Foucault, Michel (1981) Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977
        (ed. C Gordon). New York: Pantheon Books.            
      Fraser, Nancy (2022) Cannibal Capitalism: How Our System is Devouring Democracy, Care, and
        the Planet – and What We Can Do About It. London: Verso.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cai                                            39     
                                                             
       Gao, Feng (2016) Open government data in China: Lesson learnt and new approaches. In:
         Proceedings of the 17th International Digital Government Research Conference on Digital
         Government Research, pp. 501–502. New York, NY: ACM.
       Gueorguiev, Dimitar (2021) Retrofitting Leninism: Participation without Democracy in the
         People’s Republic of China. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
       Hall, Stuart (1988) The Hard Road to Renewal: Thatcherism and the Crisis of the Left. London:
         Verso.                                              
       Harvey, David (2020) The Anti-Capitalist Chronicles. London: Pluto Press.
       Hu, Qian and Zheng, Yueping (2021) Smart city initiatives: A comparative study of American and
         Chinese cities. Journal of Urban Affairs 43(4): 504–525.
       Huang, Jingyang and Tsai, Kellee S. (2022) Securing authoritarian capitalism in the digital age:
         The political economy of surveillance in China. The China Journal 88: 2–28.
       Hui, Yuk (2016) The Question Concerning Technology in China: An Essay in Cosmotechnics,
         Third Corrected Edition. Falmouth: Urbanomic.       
       Hui, Yuk (n.d.) Cosmotechnics as cosmopolitics. e-flux Journal 88.
       Jameson, Fredric (1994) The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. Ithaca,
         NY: Cornell University Press.                       
       Jameson, Fredric (2005) Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham, NC:
         Duke University Press.                              
       Jameson, Fredric (2012) A Singular Modernity. New York, NY: Verso.
       Lash, Scott (2012) Deforming the figure: Topology and the social imaginary. Theory, Culture &
         Society 29(4–5): 261–287.                           
       Lin, Chun (2013) China and Global Capitalism. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
       Lin, Lauren Yu-Hsin and Milhaupt, Curtis J (2023) China’s corporate social credit system: The
         dawn of surveillance state capitalism? The China Quarterly 256: 835–853.
       Liu, Xingjian, Song, Yan, Wu, Kang, et al. (2015) Understanding urban China with open data.
         Cities 47: 53–61.                                   
       Lu, Sheldon H. (2001) China, Transnational Visuality, Global Postmodernity. Stanford, CA:
         Stanford University Press.                          
       Marquis, Christopher and Qiao, Kunyuan (2022) Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of
         Chinese Enterprise. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
       Marvin, Simon, While, Aidan, Chen, Bei, et al. (2022) Urban AI in China: Social control or hyper-
         capitalist development in the post-smart city? Frontiers in Sustainable Cities 4: 1030318.
       Mbembe, Achille (2019) Necropolitics. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
       McGrath, Jason (2008) Postsocialist Modernity: Chinese Cinema, Literature, and Criticism in the
         Market Age. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
       Noble, Safiya (2018) Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. New
         York, NY: New York University Press.                
       Papagianneas, Straton (2023) Smart governance in China’s political-legal system. China Law and
         Society Review 6(2): 146–180.                       
       Parisi, Luciana (2019a) Critical computation: Digital automata and general artificial thinking.
         Theory, Culture & Society 36(2): 89–121.            
       Parisi, Luciana (2019b) The alien subject of AI. Subjectivity 12(1): 27–48.
       Parisi, Luciana (2019c) XENO-PATTERNING: Predictive intuition and automated imagination.
         Angelaki 24(1): 81–97.                              
       Parisi, Luciana (2021) Interactive computation and artificial epistemologies. Theory, Culture &
         Society 38(7–8): 33–53.                             
       Roberge, Jonathan and Castelle, Michael (eds) (2021) The Cultural Life of Machine Learning: An
         Incursion into Critical AI Studies. Cham: Springer International.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      40                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(3)
                                                             
      Rolf, Steve and Schindler, Seth (2023) The US–China rivalry and the emergence of state platform
        capitalism. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 55(5): 1255–1280.
      Simondon, Gilbert (2013) Technical mentality. In: De Boever, Arne, Murray, Shirley S.Y. and
        Roffe, Jon (eds) Gilbert Simondon: Being and Technology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
        Press.                                               
      Wang, Hui (2009) The End of the Revolution: China and the Limits of Modernity. London: Verso.
      Wang, Hui (2010) The ‘Tibet issue’ between east and west: Orientalism, ethnic regional auton-
        omy, and the politics of dignity. Chinese Sociology & Anthropology 42(4): 7–30.
      Webb, Amy (n.d.) China and the AI edge. Available at: https://niemanreports.org/articles/china-
        and-the-ai-edge/ (accessed 23 May 2024).             
      Wood, Ellen Meiksins (1981) The separation of the economic and the political in capitalism. New
        Left Review I 127: 66–95.                            
      Wynter, Sylvia (2003) Unsettling the coloniality of being/power/truth/freedom: Towards the
        human, after man, its overrepresentation – an argument. CR: The New Centennial Review
        3(3): 257–337.                                       
      Wynter, Sylvia (2015) On Being Human as Praxis. Durham NC: Duke University Press.
      Xie, Siqi, Luo, Ning, and Yarime, Masaru (2024) Data governance for smart cities in China: The
        case of Shenzhen. Policy Design and Practice 7(1): 66–86.
      Xu, Ruowen, Millo, Yuval, and Spence, Crawford (2024) The mountains are high and the
        emperor is far away: Credit scoring and the infrastructure of surveillance capitalism in China.
        Contemporary Accounting Research 41(2): 781–808.     
      Xu, Ying, Cugurullo, Federico, Zhang, Heming, et al. (2024) The emergence of artificial intel-
        ligence in anticipatory urban governance: Multi-scalar evidence of China’s transition
        to city brains. Journal of Urban Technology. Epub ahead of print 25 January 2024. DOI:
        10.1080/10630732.2023.2292823.                       
      Yang, Xuemin, Liu, Te, and Zheng, Yueping (2020) Review of public-private partnership research
        in digital governance: Practice, issues and prospects. Public Administration and Policy
        Review 9(5): 3–18.                                   
      Zeng, Jinghan (2020) Artificial intelligence and China’s authoritarian governance. International
        Affairs 96(6): 1441–1459.                            
      Zeng, Yiwu, Zhang, Zenghui, Ye, Zi, et al. (2023) Regional innovation effect of smart city con-
        struction in China. PLoS One 18(2): e0281862.        
      Zhang, Jun, Bates, Jo, and Abbott, Pamela (2022) State-steered smartmentality in Chinese smart
        urbanism. Urban Studies 59(14): 2933–2950.           
      Zhang, Xudong (2008) Postsocialism and Cultural Politics: China in the Last Decade of the
        Twentieth Century. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
      Zhou, Guangsu, Chu, Gaosi, Li, Lixing, et al. (2020) The effect of artificial intelligence on China’s
        labor market. China Economic Journal 13(1): 24–41    
      Zhou, Xueguang (2022) The Logic of Governance in China: An Organizational Approach.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.               
      Zuboff, Shoshana (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
        the New Frontier of Power. London: Profile Books.    
      国务院关于印发新一代人工智能发展规划的通知_科技_中国政府网[State   council of China,
        new generation artificial intelligence development plan] (n.d.). Available at: https://www.
        gov.cn/zhengce/content/2017-07/20/content_5211996.htm (accessed 23 May 2024).
      Qiaoyu Cai is a PhD candidate in English at the University of California, Santa Barbara. His cur-
      rent research explores the interconnected themes of modernity, sovereignty, and technology in the
      context of the US-China high-tech rivalry, which manifests as a contest between two paradigms of
      cloud sovereignty rooted in deeper cultural-political configurations.