[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A   New   Algorithmic     Identity                    
                                                             
       Soft Biopolitics and the Modulation of                
                                                             
       Control                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       John  Cheney-Lippold                                  
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
           Abstract                                          
           Marketing and web analytic companies have implemented sophisticated
           algorithmstoobserve,analyze,andidentifyusersthroughlargesurveillance
           networksonline.Thesecomputeralgorithmshavethecapacitytoinfercat-
           egoriesof identityupon usersbased largelyontheir web-surfinghabits.In
           this article I will first discuss the conceptual and theoretical work around
           code, outlining its usein an analysis of online categorization practices. The
           articlewillthenapproachthefunctionofcodeatthelevelofthecategory,
           arguingthatananalysisofcodedcomputeralgorithmsenablesasupplement
           toFoucauldianthinkingaroundbiopoliticsandbiopower,ofwhatIcallsoft
           biopower and soft biopolitics. These new conceptual devices allow us to
           better understand the workings of biopower at the level of the category,
           of using computer code, statistics and surveillance to construct categories
           within populations according to users’ surveilled internet history. Finally,
           the article will think through the nuanced ways that algorithmic inference
           worksasamodeofcontrol,ofprocessesofidentificationthatstructureand
           regulate our lives online within the context of online marketing and algo-
           rithmiccategorization.                            
           Key words                                         
           algorithm jbiopolitics jbiopower jcode jcontrol jDeleuze jFoucault
           jinternet                                         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       j Theory,Culture&Society2011(SAGE,LosAngeles,London,NewDelhi,andSingapore),
         Vol.28(6):164^181                                   
         DOI:10.1177/0263276411424420                        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 165
                                                             
         Introduction                                        
         L                                                   
             ETMEbeginthisarticlewithahypothetical.Youopenupanewcom-
             puter and fire up a web browser.You go to the washingtonpost.com,
             visit a couple of blogs atWordpress andTumblr, and go on the busi-
         ness social networking site linkedin.com. Maybe you take a break from the
         internet, go grab a cup of coffee, but return to watch some videos on
         Hulu, check US gossip at tmz.com, and look at the weather at wunder-
         ground.com. At this point youdecide it might bebest togo towork soyou
         close your computer, get dressed, and go outside.While you may proceed
         with your day as if nothing has happened, something has changed about
         who you are online. You have been identified. Your IP address has been
         logged; you have a cookie file installedon yourcomputer. And somewhere,
         in adatabasefar, faraway, youvery well mayhave agender, class, and race.
            This small tour of web sites provides us with a mundane example of
         what I call in the title of this article a ‘new algorithmic identity’.The net-
         worked infrastructure of the internet, with its technological capacity to
         track user movements across different web sites and servers, has given rise
         toan industryofwebanalyticsfirmsthatareactivelyamassinginformation
         on individuals and fine-tuning computer algorithms to make sense of that
         data.The product of many ofthese firms is a‘new algorithmic identity’, an
         identityformationthatworksthroughmathematical algorithmstoinfercat-
         egories of identity on otherwise anonymous beings. It uses statistical com-
         monality models to determine one’s gender, class, or race in an automatic
         manner at the same time as it defines the actual meaning of gender, class,
         or race themselves. Ultimately, it moves the practice of identification into
         an entirelydigital, andthus measureable, plane.     
            This article will examine the consequence of some of those practices
         aimed at understanding exactly what kindof user is visiting web sites, pur-
         chasing products, or consuming media. Online a category like gender is
         not determined by one’s genitalia or even physical appearance. Nor is it
         entirely self-selected. Rather, categories of identity are being inferred upon
         individuals based on their web use. Code and algorithm are the engines
         behind such inference and are the axis from which I will think through
         this new construction of identity and category online. We are entering an
         online world where our identifications are largely made for us. A‘new algo-
         rithmic identity’ is situated at a distance from traditional liberal politics,
         removedfromcivildiscourseviatheproprietary natureof manyalgorithms
         while simultaneously enjoying an unprecedented ubiquity in its reach to
         surveil and recorddata about users.                 
            In this article I will first discuss the conceptual and theoretical work
         around code, outlining its use in an analysis of online categorization prac-
         tices.The article will then approach the function of code at the level of the
         category, arguing that an analysis of coded computer algorithms enables a
         supplement to Foucauldian thinking around biopolitics and biopower, of
         what I call soft biopower and soft biopolitics.These new conceptual devices

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       166 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       will allow us to better understand the workings of biopower at the level of
       thecategory,ofusingcomputercode,statisticsandsurveillancetoconstruct
       categories within populations according to users’surveilled internet history.
       Finally, the article will think through the nuanced ways that algorithmic
       inference works as a mode of control, of processes of identification that
       structure and regulate our lives online within the contextofonline market-
       ing and algorithmiccategorization.                    
                                                             
       Code and Categorization                               
       Even spared of its technological complexity, code is still a tricky subject to
       wrapone’sheadaround.Tobeginwith,codeasaconceptisusedquiteindis-
       criminately. Some theorists see code as an architecture, of the digital walls
       and foundations that delimit our experience online.This thinking is cen-
       tered around the work of Lawrence Lessig, for whom code constructs the
       space we have to use and access information. Code, in Lessig’s mind, ‘is
       law’ (Lessig,2006:1). Rules arebothintentionallyandunintentionally writ-
       ten into the hardware and software of internet technologies that thencreate
       the infrastructure thatdetermines how we as users can act incyberspace.
           But most contemporary uses of code as a concept require a more
       dynamic definition. Nigel Thrift (2005: 173) offers code not as law but
       ‘newadaptivestandardsofconductwhichcanwork in all kindsofsituations
       at all kinds of scales’. And Alexander Galloway (2004) argues that this
       typeofcode,orhisterm‘protocol’,alsoencompassesthestandardsforinter-
       net communication (TCP/IPand DNS).The structural ways that protocols
       enable and disable particular kinds of internet traffic become viable as
       theyensurestandardization,an architectural metricsystemofsortsthrough
       which control follows from‘a set of technical procedures for defining, man-
       aging, modulating, and distributing information through a flexible yet
       robust delivery infrastructure’ (Thacker, 2004: xv). Code as architecture
       works to structure theboundaries, as well as regulate the flows, of internet
       traffic.                                              
           A key part of this regulation is in the actual work that code does, of
       creating, ordering and ultimately giving meaning to digital artifacts. Code
       as a concept must also force us to think about the mundane processes of
       data differentiation online, specifically of determining how a variable like
       X orY can come to be defined, what X and Y actually mean and, most
       importantly, how users experience X and Y within the architecture that
       code creates. Stephen Graham echoes this sentiment with his workon‘soft-
       ware-sorting’, of ‘directly, automatically and continuously allocating social
       or geographical access to all sorts of critical goods, services, life chances or
       mobilityopportunities to certain social groups orgeographical areas’ (2005:
       3). Code is part of a dynamic relationship to the real world, one that can
       ‘automatically and continuously’affect life chances offered to users based
       on a pre-configured but also reflexive programmed logic. But rather than
       look at code as just an automated and adaptive gatekeeper of critical

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 167
                                                             
         information, we can explore its function much more constitutionally. An
         analysisthatcentersoncodeallowsustolookatalistoflinesofacomputer
         language and seehow it uses certain representations oftheworld (variables
         and data) to produce new value. A new value like X¼male can then be
         used to suggest sorting exercises, like targeted content and advertisements,
         based entirely on assumptions around that value. Yet code can also con-
         struct meaning. While it can name X as male, it can also develop what
         ‘male’maycome tobe defined as online.               
            But this new value is not corralled within an entirely digital realm.
         When a user changes her profile on Facebook to state her‘sex’, there’s both
         adelimitingaction (ofthe setdrop-down menuchoices availabletodescribe
         one’s ‘sex’ of male or female) as well as a cultural discourse (what does
         being female online mean?) through which code speaks (Fuller, 2008).The
         nascent field of software studies looks at cultural practices that exceed the
         materialworld of code, of incorporating an analysis that takes into account
         human-machine interactions as well as the technology of machines them-
         selves (Cramer, 2005).The study ofcode and software in general tries to go
         ‘beyond the blip’ to understand the implicit politics of computer code, ‘to
         makevisiblethedynamics, structures, regimes, anddrives’ofthewidevari-
         ety of programmed scripts that are littered across the internet (Fuller,
         2003:32).Withthis view we can see computercode not as a literal, rhetori-
         cal text from which we derive meaning but a complex set of relationships
         that tie together the coded systems of definition and organization that con-
         stituteourexperienceonline.Codesareculturalobjectsembeddedandinte-
         grated within a social system whose logic, rules, and explicit functioning
         work to determine the new conditions of possibilities of users’ lives. How a
         variable like X comes tobe defined, then, is not the resultofobjective fact
         but is ratheratechnologically-mediated andculturally-situatedconsequence
         ofstatistics andcomputer science.                   
         Categorization                                      
         MyargumentwillfocusontheprocessofdefiningX,oftheidentificationof
         particulargroups within populations largely throughthe marketing logic of
         consumption.Within marketing, considerable research goes to identify the
         composition of a consumer audience. In thepast, consumers were discrimi-
         nated basedoncensus-data laden geographies: richpeoplelived in acertain
         ZIP code, poor people lived in another, and businesses could provide cou-
         pons for class-differentiated products and services accordingly (Gandy,
         1993). A movefromdemographictopsychographiccategorizationsfollowed,
         where clusters of consumer types were created to better understand the
         non-essentialist character of demographic-based consumption patterns (not
         all white people are interested in timeshares in Boca Raton, but those who
         are older and with money are) (Yankelovich and Meer, 2006; Arviddson,
         2006). An important shift in marketing happened as marketers went
         online and were able to use data from search queries to create behavioral
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       168 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       understandings atop these clusters (Turrow, 2006). Purchase and other
       behavioraldatawere then lumped intohow marketers see and interact with
       individuals through the construction of ‘databases of intentions’, where
       userinformationandsearchqueriesareaggregatedtounderstandintentions
       ^ such as purchase intent ^ as well as general trends in social wants and
       needs (Battelle, 2005). Mathematical algorithms allowed marketersto make
       sense out of these data to better understand how to more effectively target
       services, advertisements, and content.Through algorithms, commonalities
       between data can be parsed and patterns within data then identified and
       labeled. And with the capacities of computers to surveil and capture user
       activity across the internet, consumer information was removed from the
       shackles of time-bound, decadal census data and began to float atop a con-
       stant stream of real-time web use that can be matched against existing
       behaviorand identity models ^ like gender.            
           Sucha shift focusesnotonessential notionsof identitybutinsteadon
       pliablebehavioralmodels,undergirdedbyalgorithms,thatallowforthecre-
       ation of a cybernetic relationship to identification. New worlds online (of
       content or advertisements) are created according to newly identified user
       data and interactions. Continually updated new content can then be sug-
       gested to users based on the history of a user’s interactions with the
       system, which are compiled into a particular identity for that user (like
       X¼male). As the capacity of computers to aggregate user data increases
       and algorithms are improvedupon to make disparate data more intelligible
       and useful, the ability for real-time cybernetic modeling to monitor, com-
       pute, and act becomes more efficient. So as more data is received about a
       certain user’s behavior online, new coded computations can be done to
       change who the user is believed to be and what content that user might
       desire (the gender of the same user might change from male to female if
       enoughuserdata, suchasthe additionofcertainweb sitesthat user visited,
       are presented to statistically identify that user with a different gender). In
       this constant feedback loopwe encounter a form of control. But this is not
       a control that we can explain through references to code as law. It does not
       present us with static norms of conduct or of unsurpassable rules that pre-
       vent particular uses. Code also regulates the innards of the internet. It
       playsaconstitutiveroleinthemundaneactivities^ ofwhatbookI’mrecom-
       mended at a particular moment or what kind of shampoo I’m advertised
       when I’m visiting a particular web page.This thinking falls into a variety
       of models ofcybernetics, fromVincent Mosco’s (1996) cybernetic commod-
       ity thatdetails information aboutconsumer transactions andcreates adata-
       base of user behavior to Nikolas Rose’s (1999) cybernetics of control that
       explores how normative assumptions of daily life become embeddedwithin
       the circuits ofour education, employment, andconsumptionpractices.
           But I argue we can even more effectively understand this process
       as modulation, of a Deleuzeian approach to control that relies on practices
       characterized by the terms of the societies of control (Deleuze, 1992).
       This move offers us a way of seeing how many mechanisms of control

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 169
                                                             
         have shifted to practices external to the body, where discipline has often
         become more or less unnecessary if control can be enacted through a
         series of guiding, determining, and persuasive mechanisms of power.
         Instead of constructing subjectivity exclusively through disciplinary power,
         with normative discourses prefiguring how we engage with and even talk
         about the world, a regulative approach allows for a distance between power
         and subject (Foucault, 2008). It configures life by tailoring its conditions
         of possibility. Regulation predicts our lives as users by tethering the poten-
         tial for alternative futures to our previous actions as users based on con-
         sumption and research for consumption. Control in this formation
         becomes best represented by the concept of modulation, ‘a self-deforming
         cast that will continuouslychange from one moment to the other, or like a
         sieve whose mesh will transmute from point to point’ that sees perpetual
         training replacing serial encounters with singular, static institutions
         (Deleuze,1992:4). Andmodulationmarksacontinuouscontroloversociety
         that speaks to individuals in a sort of coded language, of creating not indi-
         viduals but endlessly sub-dividable ‘dividuals’ (Deleuze, 1992).These divi-
         duals become the axiom of control, the recipients through which power
         flows as subjectivity takes a deconstructed dive into the digital era.When
         we situate this process within questions around digital identity, dividuals
         can be seen as those data that are aggregated to form unified subjects, of
         connecting dividual parts through arbitrary closures at the moment of the
         compilation of acomputer programorat the resultofa databasequery.
            Dividual pieces, ontowhich Iconceptually mapthe rawdata obtained
         by internet marketing surveillance networks, are made intelligible andthus
         constitute the digital subject through code and computer algorithms.The
         algorithmic process that I will focus on in this article looks at the web ana-
         lytics firm Quantcast as it infers certain categorical identifications from
         seemingly meaningless web data.1 As new information gets created about
         an individual through the tracking of her web presence, a user’s identity
         becomes more defined within the system in accord with the logic of
         Quantcast’s identification algorithms. If I would surf on Quantcast’s
         member sites for several hours, my initially unknown gender would
         become more concrete in the face of Quantcast’s algorithms, as exemplified
         in the hypothetical that begins this article. Dividual fragments flow across
         seemingly open and frictionless networks and into rigid database fields as
         partofthesubsumptionimplicitindatamining(thepracticeof findingpat-
         ternswithinthe chaosof rawdata). As auser travels acrossthesenetworks,
         algorithms can topologically striate her surfing data, allocating certain web
         artifacts into particular, algorithmically-defined categories like gender.The
         fact that user X visits the web site CNN.com might suggest that X could
         becategorizedasmale. Andadditionaldatacouldthenbuttressorresignify
         how X is categorized. As X visits more sites like CNN.com, X’s maleness
         is statistically reinforced, adding confidence to the measure that X may be
         male. As X visits more sites that are unlike CNN.com, X’s maleness

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       170 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       might be put into question or potentially resignified to another gender
       identity.                                             
           In this example, web data’s apparent chaos and undefinability, of the
       limitlesspossibilitiesthatanydatasetinitiallyoffers,isallocatedintospeci-
       fic categories.The implicit disorder of data collected about an individual
       isorganized,defined,andmadevaluablebyalgorithmicallyassigningmean-
       ingtouserbehavior^ andinturnlimitingthepotentialexcessofmeanings
       that raw data offer. By using these dividual fragments, a subject’s identity
       can be articulated according to the programmed rationale ofthe algorithm.
       Ultimately, and after certain statistical checks of confidence, this articula-
       tion can result in a unified and static status: X is male. As described in a
       Quantcast white paper outlining the company’s inference methodology,
       these static user identities help determine the gendered make-up of a site
       (Quantcast, 2008). By tracking users and algorithmically assigning catego-
       ries according to their behavior, Quantcast maydefine the gender composi-
       tion of a site on its network as 73 percent male and 27 percent female. But
       as more inferred-as-female users begin to visit the site, the site’s gender
       identity has the chance to change in accord (for example to 72 percent
       male and 28 percent female).The indirect consequence of this dynamism
       comes as a site’s altered gendered make-up then can play a constitutive
       part in reconfiguring the statistical groupings that Quantcast uses to infer
       gender upon its users. New, not-yet-gendered individuals that visit this site
       may still be identified as male but now with a statistical confidence poten-
       tiallylessthanpreviouslycalculated.2                  
           In requisite cybernetic fashion a user’s ascribed gender can and may
       change as new user information arrives into the cybernetic system..This
       typeofuseridentitydoesnotapproachidentityformationfromanessential-
       ist framework. Rather, algorithms allowa shift to a more flexible and func-
       tional definition of the category, one that de-essentializes gender from its
       corporeal and societal forms and determinations while it also re-essentia-
       lizes gender as a statistically-related, largely market research-driven cate-
       gory. Gender becomes a vector, a completely digital and math-based
       association that defines the meaning of maleness, femaleness, or whatever
       other gender (or category) a marketer requires.These categorizations are
       very much tied to the groupings of what a company like Quantcast finds
       useful, namely those that are derived from the world of market research
       (gender, age, income). And while offline data can be used to supplement
       algorithmic inference measures, the move toward a vector-based category
       marks a separationofthecategory from itsnormativedomain anda reasso-
       ciation of that category according to statistical correlation. Of course real
       worldpreconceptions aroundthe meanings ofcategories feed into the foun-
       dational definitions that we have about certain genders, races, and classes
       online (Nakamura, 2002). In most cases, predetermined biases about the
       nature of group identity will be maintained online. But the capacity for
       cybernetic categorization to regulate certain categories’ meaning according

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 171
                                                             
         toalgorithmmarksamoveawayfromofflinestereotypesandintoaformof
         statistical stereotyping.                           
            Rather than maintaining a particular and concrete relationship to
         malenessintheofflineworld, acyberneticconceptionofgender wouldposi-
         tion maleness as a modulating category, based on a vector and composed
         of statistical assessments that define male group membership. New
         information can come to light within this algorithmic system and an algo-
         rithm can subsequently move to change both a category’s meaning and the
         once-essential ideals ascribed to that category. Gender as a category still
         holds the capacity for discipline ^ of serving targeted advertisements and
         targeted content according to the inferred digital identity of a user ^ but it
         also is embodied by a new and flexible cybernetic categorization system.
         Insteadofstandardsofmalenessdefininganddiscipliningbodiesaccording
         to an ideal type of maleness, standards of maleness can be suggested to
         users based on one’s presumed digital identity, from which the success of
         identification can be measured according to ad click-through rates, page
         views, and other assorted feedback mechanisms.The regulation of gender
         as a category then becomes wholly embedded within the logic of consump-
         tion, where categorical behaviors are statistically defined through a cyber-
         netics of purchasing and research that marketers have deemed valuable for
         identification andcategorization.                   
            As the specifics of Quantcast’s algorithms remain proprietary, we can
         use other examples of ‘machine learning’ to help us explicate this process
         in the public domain. Put simply, machine learning is the ‘technical
         basis...usedtoextract information fromtherawdata indatabases ^ infor-
         mation that is [then] expressed in a comprehensible form and can be used
         for a variety of purposes’ such as prediction and inference (Witten and
         Frank, 2005: xxiii). Machines are programmed to learn patterns in data
         and use those correlative patterns to analyze and make assessments about
         new data.Yahoo researchers, for example, have described the capacity for
         an algorithm to infer demographic categories of identity (race, gender).
         Based on search query logs, user profile data, and US census data, these
         researchersfoundtheycan subsequentlytailorresults accordingtousercat-
         egorizations. If a particular user issues the query ‘wagner’, an algorithm
         canofferdifferentiatedresultsasdeterminedbythatuser’sgendercategori-
         zation. Based on the observed web habits of ‘typical’ women and men,
         search results for ‘wagner’ can include sites about the composer ‘Richard
         Wagner’ for women while at the same time provide sites on‘Wagner USA’
         paint supplies for men (Weber and Castillo, 2010). Similarly, researchers in
         Israel have created an algorithm that predicts an author’s gender based on
         lexical and syntacticfeatures. Upon separating the writtenworks of women
         andmen,statisticalcorrelationswereruntocreateavector-basedcategoriza-
         tion oftwogender’s written features, through which the algorithm was able
         to then identify the ‘correct’ gender of a new, non-categorized work with a
         success rate of 80 percent (Koppel et al., 2002). But undergirding all of
         this is the theoretical possibility that these statistical models can change

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       172 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       givennewdata.Thechancethatmen,intheYahooexample,stopclickingon
       paint supplies and start clicking on music sites could statistically suggest
       thatYahoo’sdefinitionof ‘men’may notbe appropriate. Andthepossibility
       that an inferred-as-male writer may not write like every man before him
       can make an algorithm statisticallysecond guess itsinitialvector-basedcat-
       egorization. Categories always have the capacity for change, off and online,
       but the shift I want to bring to the world of identity is the continuous,
       data-centered manner that modulates both user experience (what content
       theysee) as well as the categorical foundationofthose identifications.
       Soft Biopower and Soft Biopolitics                    
       I argue that with cybernetic categorization comes a new analytical axis of
       power: the digital construction of categories of identity. A recent call to
       rethink biopolitics, tounderstandthehistoricalcontext fromwhichcontem-
       porary forms of control over populations interact, does well to push us
       away from more modernist conceptions of biopower and biopolitics and
       into a realm of contemporary, localized biopolitical analysis (Revel, 2009).
       My own analysis will focus on biopower as it works in the construction of
       identity, of the‘power over life’ through the management of subjects at the
       levelofthepopulation (Foucault,2003a:135).Theregulatory workof biopo-
       litical technologies does much to understand the shift Foucault articulated
       from power of sovereignty to power over life (Foucault, 2008). And it
       allowsustoassesstheimpactofsomewhatethically-ambiguoustechnologies
       of biopower. In what Foucault calls security mechanisms we can see the
       technologies installed to regulate the inherent randomness in any popula-
       tion of human beings so as to optimize a particular state of life (Foucault,
       2003a: 246). I address these mechanisms through computer algorithm-
       based categorization that work to biopolitically manage and control groups
       of people.                                            
           Biopolitics’origin in18th-century society worked to supplement exist-
       ing modes of disciplinary power, of introducing forms of regulatory power
       that found a new type of control of populations at the level of the man-as-
       species (Foucault, 2003a). Using statistics, demographic assessments, and
       throughananalysisofbirthanddeath rates,governmentwas abletosituate
       itself in a relationship with subjects not only vis-a'-vis individual bodies
       but vis-a'-vis the population and sub-populations. Statistics, forecasting,
       andmeasurementbecamethepreferredmodesofregulation,ofgovernmen-
       tal intervention at a level of ‘generality’ ^ the level where parts of life are
       determined and through which a temporary homeostasis could be achieved
       (Foucault 2007, 2008). Biopolitics in traditional Foucauldian terms has
       been centered in the practices of achieving this equilibrium. I situate my
       intervention with the different processes of categorization that allow us to
       come to this equilibrium through‘a technology which brings together the
       mass effects of characteristic of a population, which tries to control the
       series of random events that can occur in a living mass, a technology
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 173
                                                             
         whichtriestopredicttheprobabilityofthoseevents(bymodifyingit,ifnec-
         essary) or at leastcompensatefor their effects’ (Foucault, 2003a:249).
            With the construction of categories we can see how biopolitical work
         controls those random events, of creating what Foucault calls‘caesuras’, or
         breaks in the biological continuum of characteristics of life (Foucault,
         2003a; Macey,2009). Biopower worksthrougha seriesofdividingpractices,
         aprocessofobjectificationoutlinedinLouiseAmoore’s(2006:339)analysis
         of border technology biometrics that actonpopulations throughthe catego-
         rizations of ‘student’, ‘Muslim’, ‘woman’, ‘alien’, ‘immigrant’, and ‘illegal’.
         ButthemoveIwanttomakeistoanalyzetheroleofwhatItermsoftbiopo-
         litics, of how biopolitical processes give meaning to the categorizations that
         makeuppopulationsandthroughwhichwecanlookatthevariableindirect
         processes of regulation.To explicate soft biopolitics is to better understand
         not just how populations are managed but the changing relationship that
         categories have to populations and, most importantly, what categories actu-
         allycome tomean and be redefined as.                
            We can also take a grounded example with a biopolitical tinge to
         explore this process. Say you are categorized as a male through your use-
         patterns online. Medical services and health-related advertisements could
         be served to you based on that gendered categorization.This means that
         those who are not categorized as male may not experience the same adver-
         tisement and opportunities, enacting the consequences of what was already
         referredtoas‘software-sorting’ (Graham,2005). Butwhiletheinitialbiopo-
         litical relationship of subject and power would stop at this point, the intro-
         duction of the notion of cybernetic categorization can provide another
         perspective of Foucauldian power. Users are not categorized according to
         one-off census survey data but through a process of continual interaction
         with, and modification of, the categories through which biopolitics works.
         In marketing, these categorizations are constructed within the logic of con-
         sumercapitalism, wherebiopower can govern subjects at a distance, guard-
         ing their apparent autonomy while ‘[optimizing] systems of difference, in
         which the field is left open to fluctuating processes... [and] in which there
         is anenvironmentaltypeof intervention insteadoftheinternal subjugation
         of individuals’ (Foucault, 2008: 259^60). Category construction in itself
         has become a biopolitical endeavor, where Foucauldian security dilemmas
         are resolved not just by enactment or change of policy but also through an
         alteration in how existing policy reaches subjects. Maleness can be con-
         stantlyevaluated according tofeedbackdata, throughwhichthe definitions
         of maleness can shift (toinclude or exclude transgendered folk, for justone
         example) according to the logic of the algorithm. Policies that rely on gen-
         deredcategorizationsthencan be automaticallyandcontinuously reoriented
         to address new populations.                         
            These algorithmic definitions then supplement existing discursive
         understandings of a category like gender ^ most fundamentally through
         the language of gender itself ^ with statistical conclusions of what an idea
         like maleness actually is.The exclusivityofgender’s meaning then becomes

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       174 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       held within the logic of the categorical system as defined by a particular
       algorithm.The cybernetic definition and redefinition of gender then pro-
       videsaformof elasticitytopower. Atthiscategoricallevelthereexistsathe-
       oretical modulation that restages the relationship that biopower has
       to subjects. In our above example, medical advertisements targeted to
       men represent such power on two fronts. First, traditional biopolitical
       action of medical services helps manage life.The state or corporate power
       can biopolitically aim to reduce STD transfer among the male population
       byadvertisingcondoms or safe sex behaviors. And second, thenormalizing
       forceofwhatitmeanstobecategorizedasmalebecomesabiopoliticalactiv-
       ity.The category of gender in our example is a result of statistical analyses
       that regulate what Foucaultcalls the‘conductofconduct’, or more appropri-
       atelybydiscursively positioningmalenesstoindirectly, and largely uninten-
       tionally, control the conditions of possibilities afforded to users who are
       targeted as male (Foucault, 1982). It is this regulation of the randomness
       in gendered populations that optimizes through soft biopower a particular
       stateof life as defined byalgorithm.                  
           The demands put on soft biopower ^ of updatable categories that can
       adapt to the dynamism of populations ^ require malleable, modulatingcat-
       egorical groupings in order to effectively define and redefine categories’
       meaning.The truthof what is gendered male requires us to dig beneath its
       potential self-evidence (scientific statistical probability models) and into a
       larger schema of power relations, of understanding the‘fundamental codes
       of a culture ^ those governing its language, its schemas of perception, its
       exchanges, its techniques, its values...[that] establish for every man...
       the empirical orders with which he will be dealing and within which he
       will be at home’ (Foucault,1973: xx). But Foucault denotes a middle space,
       betweenthesecodedlimitationsofourculture,ononehand,andphilosoph-
       ical and scientific interpretations of order on the other (for example, God
       created and classified the world).This middle space is where soft biopower
       lives, where the modulation of categorical identity changes according to a
       ‘culture, imperceptibly deviating from the empirical orders prescribed for
       it by its primary codes...[that] frees itself sufficiently to discover that
       these orders are perhaps not the only possible ones or the best ones’
       (Foucault,1973: xx).                                  
           By stepping through the concept of cybernetic categorization we can
       follow this important move etched by Foucault in his understanding of the
       social construction of categories. First, ontologies are embedded within a
       setofpowerrelations.Second,thecategoriesthatarebredfromthoseontol-
       ogies exercise a profound impact on how we as subjects encounter our
       world. And third, changes in our categorizing schematics are indebted to
       this fundamental coding of a culture, from which I find a strong parallel
       tothetechnologicalorganizationofsubjectidentitiesthroughcodeandalgo-
       rithm.The knowledge formation implicit in algorithmic work ‘creates and
       causes to emerge new objects of knowledge and accumulates new bodies of
       information’ that ultimately give rise to new categorization practices, in the

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 175
                                                             
         case of the shift from offline to online marketing, but also redefined cate-
         gorical meanings in the case of cybernetic categorization (Foucault, 1980:
         52).This redefinition is part of what others have argued is a shift toward
         a‘topological’approach to genealogy, one that identifies‘patterns of correla-
         tions’that leadtotheformationof particulardispositions of unifiedhetero-
         geneous elements (Collier, 2009). While Collier’s treatment of a ‘topology
         of power’ takes these elements as awide arrayofdifferent and recombined
         techniques andtechnologies to create aunified state of power relations, the
         same logic can be applied to algorithm. Patterns of correlation can be
         foundintechnologiesofalgorithmiccategorization,ofrecombininganduni-
         fying heterogeneous elements of data that have no inner necessity or
         coherence.                                          
            The softer versionsof biopowerandbiopolitics supplementthediscur-
         siveproductionofcategories’meanings, asitis alsothroughdata andstatis-
         tical analysis that conceptions of gender change ^ not just through
         discourse and its subsequent naturalization (Foucault, 1973).3 In order to
         understand the regulatory process of biopolitics we need to place additional
         attention on the biopolitical construction of these categorizations. Here we
         can better define soft biopower and soft biopolitics. The former signifies
         the changing nature of categories that on their own regulate and manage
         life. Unlike conceptions of hard biopower that regulate life throughthe use
         of categorizations, soft biopower regulates how those categories themselves
         are determined to define life. And if we describe biopolitics as Foucault
         does, as ‘the endeavor...to rationalize the problems presented to govern-
         mental practice by the phenomena characteristic of a group of living
         human beings constituted as a population’, soft biopolitics constitutes the
         ways that biopower defines what a population is and determines how that
         population is discursively situated anddeveloped (Foucault, 2003b:73).
         Control                                             
         I argue these defining practices of soft biopower and soft biopolitics act as
         mechanisms of regulatory control. For the remainder of this article I will
         understand control as ‘operating through conditional access to circuits of
         consumption andcivility’, interpretingcontrol’s markon subjects as a guid-
         ing mechanism that opens and closes particular conditions of possibility
         that users can encounter (Rose, 2000: 326). The feedback mechanism
         required in this guiding mechanism is the process of suggestion. I define
         suggestion as the opening (and consequent closing) of conditional access as
         determined byhow the user is categorizedonline.4    
            AscategorizationsgetconstructedbyfirmslikeQuantcast,refinedby
         algorithms that process online behavior, and continually improved upon as
         more and more time passes and more and more web artifacts are inputted
         into a database, advertisements and content are then suggested to users
         according to their perceived identities. In cybernetic categorization these
         groupings are always changeable, following the user and suggesting new
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       176 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       artifactstobe visited, seen, orconsumed. Importantly, the cyberneticfeed-
       back loop exists only in so far as it productively aids in the maintenance of
       the system.The process of suggestion works to the extent that algorithmic
       inference adeptlycategorizes.5 If aparticular suggestion is misguided, algo-
       rithms areprogrammedtointerpret a mis-categorization and reassign acat-
       egoryof identitybasedonthat user’s newlyobserved behavior.
           Historically thinking around control in the field of surveillance has
       focusedonadirectrelationshiptothesubject.DavidLyondescribessurveil-
       lance as‘theroutineways [that] focused attention ispaidtopersonaldetails
       by organizations that want to influence, manage, or control certain persons
       or population groups’ (Lyon, 2003a:5). Lyon’s explicit mention ofcontrol in
       a longer list including‘influence’and‘manage’presents a largely direct and
       causal description of control. Organizations surveil because they ‘want to’
       determine discriminatory pricing (commercial surveillance), discourage
       crime (CCTV), or apprehend criminals (NSA surveillance programs).6 I
       proposewe approach Lyon’sdefinition from a more subtle and indirectrela-
       tionship of control.Through what I term cybernetic categorization, catego-
       ries’ meaning can be realigned according to the code and algorithmic
       modelsbuilt to targetcontent toparticularconsumers.Theprocess of iden-
       tification, at least in the online world, becomes mediated by what I term
       softbiopolitics,asuseridentitiesbecometetheredtoasetofmovable,statis-
       tically-defined categorizations that then can have influence in biopolitical
       decisions by states and corporations.This control resembles Nikolas Rose’s
       (1999:49^50) conceptof ‘government at adistance’, of regulatinghow iden-
       titycan be governed‘through the decisions and endeavours of non-political
       modes of authority [that are] distanced spatially, in that these technologies
       ofgovernment link a multitude of expertsindistant sites to the calculation
       ofthose at acenter’. Controlthenworks atlevelsfar pastthepurviewof lib-
       eral individualism, situating subjects within networks of power that govern
       indirectly and without proximity.The individual user is incapable of really
       experiencing the effect that algorithms have in determining one’s life as
       algorithms rarely, if ever, speak to the individual. Rather, individuals are
       seen by algorithm and surveillance networks as members of categories. So
       instead of positioning the individual as the locus of research, the addition
       ofthe level of the categorycan enable us to better understand the structur-
       ing of our lives under surveillance as well as the myriad ways control can
       work on both individuals and categories. And it is here that the potential
       for discourse around identity becomes problematic.The identifications that
       make us as subjects online are becoming more opaque and buried, away
       fromourindividualvantagepointsandremovedfrommostformsofcritical
       participation.They are increasingly finding mediation outside the realm of
       traditionalpoliticalinterventionandinsidetheblackboxesofsearchengines
       and algorithmic inference systems (Beckerand Stalder, 2009).
           This system of regulative control makes a break with the theoretical
       lineage aroundcontrol andtechnology that wasbegot in theworldofcyber-
       punk, as we travel away from the liberal focus on the individual and

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 177
                                                             
         towardthe structuringformsofsuggestion atworkwhenusersthat aregen-
         dered (or with any other categorical identity) visit a web page.7 Such ubiq-
         uity demonstrates a capacity, and the increasing use of that capacity, to
         employ surveillance technologies to gather data about both users and popu-
         lations in general. But this ubiquity also needs to take into account an
         anti-technologicaldeterministicperspectivethatallowsfortechnologicalfail-
         ure. Surveillance technologies do not work as designed all the time, andwe
         have seen with the example of CCTV that technological capacity does not
         ensure a humancapacity to adeptly monitor and analyze that technology.8 I
         agree withWendy Hui Kyong Chun (2006) when she argues that the inter-
         net is neither a tool for freedom nor a tool for total control. Control is
         never complete, and neither is our freedom. At this present moment, web
         analytic firms have made it nearly impossible to not be incorporated into
         surveillance networks.We are always vulnerable to some degree of surveil-
         lance’s gaze. But vulnerability, the historical point of departure when we
         define freedom in its most classical liberal sense, should then be thought
         not as the revocation of autonomy or one’s suffocation under control
         (Chun, 2006).                                       
            Control has become a modulating exercise, much like Deleuze pre-
         dicted, which constitutes an integral part of contemporary life as it works
         not just on the body nor just on the population, but in how we define our-
         selves and others (Deleuze, 1992). Deleuze is vital for exploring these pro-
         cesses for the very fact that he understood the shift from ‘enclosed’
         environments of disciplinary society to the open terrain of the societies of
         control. Enclosureoffersthe idea of walls, of barriers to databases and sur-
         veillance technologies. Openness describes a freedom to action that at the
         same time is also vulnerable to surveillance and manipulation. And these
         open mechanisms of control, the automated categorization practices and
         the advertisements and content targeted to those categorizations effectively
         situate and define how we create and manage our own identities.
         Surveillancepracticeshaveincreasinglymovedfromasetof inflexibledisci-
         plinary practices that operate at the level of the individual to the statistical
         regulation of categorical groupings: ‘it is not the personal identity of the
         embodiedindividualbutrathertheactuarialorcategoricalprofileofthecol-
         lective which is of foremost concern’ to new, unenclosed surveillance net-
         works (Hier,2003:402).                              
            Cyberneticcategorizationprovidesanelasticrelationshiptopower,one
         that uses the capacity of suggestion to softly persuade users towards
         models of normalized behavior and identity through the constant redefini-
         tion of categories of identity. If a certain set of categories ceases to effec-
         tively regulate, another set can quickly be reassigned to a user, providing a
         seemingly seamless experience online that still exerts a force over who that
         user is.This force is not entirely benign but is instead something that tells
         uswhoweare,whatwewant,andwhoweshouldbe.Itisremovedfromtra-
         ditional mechanisms for resistance and ultimately requires us to conceive
         of freedom, in whatever form, much more differently than previously

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       178 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       thought.We are effectively losing control in defining who we are online, or
       morespecificallywearelosingownershipoverthemeaningofthecategories
       that constitute our identities. Algorithm ultimately exercises control over
       usby harnessing these forces through the creation of relationships between
       real-world surveillance data and machines capable of making statistically
       relevant inferences about what that data can mean. And the processes
       of soft biopower work in a similar fashion, allowing for a modularity of
       meaning that is always productive ^ in that it constantlycreates new infor-
       mation ^ and always following and surveilling its subjects to ensure that
       its user data are effective. New cybernetic category constructions are the
       consequence of this modularity and ultimately allow for a ‘free’, but con-
       stantlyconditioned, user.                             
                                                             
       Notes                                                 
                                                             
       1. Quantcast(www.quantcast.com) is awebanalyticscompany thatoperates as a
       free service where member sites include HTML snippets of code into each
       HTMLpageonawebserver.Thesesnippets‘phonehome’toQuantcastdatabases
       every time a user visits a site.This recording of user visits is then aggregated
       overtimetocreateahistoryofauser’swebuseacrossvariouswebsites.
       2. Quantcastusesmorethan justweb-usedatatoinfercategoriesuponitsusers^
       ‘An increasing variety of inputs can be used to continually validate and refine
       Quantcastinferencemodels’ ^ buttheimpact andextentofthesedata inputs are
       unknown. I willthusfocusonwebuse exclusively (QuantcastCorporation,2008:
       1).                                                   
       3. Soft as aprefixcan be elaboratedbylinkingbiopower totwosimilarconcepts
       from different literatures. In the more proximate field of computer science, soft
       computingdevelopedasprogrammersmovedfromaworldofperfectcomputation
       and into a fuzzier variety of close-enough, inexact solutions to problems (Zadeh,
       1994).This mimics the shift from essential modes of identity online and toward
       fuzzyconceptions of statistical belief ^ auser is likely malebasedonprobability.
       And in a theoretical parallel to diplomatic soft power, soft biopower works as a
       more flexible form of power that uses attraction and influence to achieve its
       goals.Wherethebruteforceofbiopoliticalaction(populationcontrol)ismediated
       through definition and redefinition of the targeted category, the brute force of
       hard state-power (war) is mediated through diplomatic mechanisms and argu-
       mentsaroundmutualbenefit(Nye,2002).‘Hard’biopoweractsbydividingpopu-
       lations and enacting policy to control subjects through those divisions; soft
       biopower acts by taking those divisions and modulating categories’ meaning so
       astobestservetherationaleofhardbiopower.              
       4. One example in particular of how one’s conditions of possibility may be
       affected through targeting is what Cass Sunstein (2007) defines as ‘The Daily
       Me’, an individualized arrayof informationthat pertains to theperceivedor pro-
       vided interests of a user, theoretically decreasing the chance that the user will
       encounter news or information that may contradict his existing views about the
       world.                                                

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 179
                                                             
         5. ‘Adeptlycategorizes’does not mean‘correctlycategorizes’.The re-essentializing
         moveofthis categorizationprocess relies onthefact that acategorization fitsthe
         behaviorofauser,notthattheuserhimself embodiesthatcategory.
         6. ForworkoncommercialsurveillanceseeLyon(2003b);forworkonCCTV see
         Lomell(2004);forworkontheNSAseeBamford(2001).       
         7. This liberal notion is most famously articulated in the workof Gibson (1984)
         andDick(1968),bothofwhomdefinedcyberpunk’sinsistenceontheindividual’s
         directrelationshipwithpower.                        
         8. The extent to which CCTV works is arguable, though analysis by Webster
         (2009) has offered a strong case that CCTV does little to prevent crime.The
         number of cameras in London alone, which has elicited a constant cry from pri-
         vacyadvocates,makeshumanobservationofthetechnologynearimpossible.
                                                             
         References                                          
         Amoore, L. (2006) ‘Biometric Borders: Governing Mobilities in the War on
         Terror’,PoliticalGeography25:336^351.               
         Arvidsson, A. (2006) Brands: Meaning andValue in Media Culture. NewYork:
         Routledge.                                          
         Bamford,J.(2001)BodyofSecrets.NewYork:RandomHouse.  
         Battelle, J. (2005) The Search: How Google andits Rivals Rewrotethe Rules of
         BusinessandTransformedOurCulture.NewYork:Portfolio. 
         Becker, K. (2009) ‘The Power of Classification: Culture, Context, Command,
         Control, Communications, Computing’, in K. Becker and F. Stalder (eds) Deep
         Search: The Politics of Search Beyond Google. Munich: Studienverlag &
         Transaction.                                        
         Becker,K.andF.Stalder(2009)‘Introduction’,inK.BeckerandF.Stalder(eds)
         Deep Search: The Politics of Search Beyond Google. Munich: Studienverlag &
         Transaction.                                        
         Chun,W.H.K. (2006) Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of
         FiberOptics.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.                  
         Collier, S. (2009) ‘Topologies of Power: Foucault’s Analysis of Political
         GovernmentBeyond‘‘Governmentality’’’,Theory,Culture&Society26(6):79^109.
         Cramer, F. (2005) ‘Words Made Flesh: Code, Culture, Imagination’. Available at:
         http://pzwart.wdka.hro.nl/mdr/research/fcramer/wordsmadeflesh (consulted
         January2010).                                       
         Deleuze,G.(1992)‘PostscriptontheSocietiesofControl’,October59:3^7.
         Dick,P.(1968)DoAndroidsDreamofElectricSheep?NewYork:RandomHouse.
         Foucault,M.(1973)TheOrderof Things:AnArchaeologyoftheHumanSciences.
         NewYork:VintageBooks.                               
         Foucault,M.(1979)DisciplineandPunish:BirthofthePrison.NewYork:Vintage
         Books.                                              
         Foucault,M.(1980)‘Two-Lectures’,inC.Gordon(ed.)Power/Knowledge:Selected
         InterviewsandOtherWritings,1972^1977.NewYork:PantheonBooks.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       180 Theory,Culture&Society 28(6)                      
                                                             
       Foucault,M.(1982)‘Afterward:TheSubjectandthePower’,inH.DreyfusandP.
       Rabinow (eds) Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics.
       Chicago:UniversityofChicagoPress.                     
       Foucault, M. (2003a) Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the Colle'ge de
       France,1975^1976.NewYork:Picador.                     
       Foucault,M.(2003b)Ethics:SubjectivityandTruth.NewYork:NewPress.
       Foucault, M. (2007) Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Colle'ge de
       France,1977^1978.NewYork:PalgraveMacmillan.           
       Foucault, M. (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Colle'ge de France,
       1978^1979.NewYork:PalgraveMacmillan.                  
       Fuller, M. (2003) Behind the Blip: Essays on the Culture of Software. Brooklyn:
       Autonomedia.                                          
       Fuller,M.(ed.)(2008)SoftwareStudies:ALexicon.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
       Galloway, A. (2004) Protocol: How Control Exists After Decentralization.
       Cambridge,MA:MITPress.                                
       Gandy, O. (1993) The Panoptic Sort: A Political Economy of Personal
       Information.Boulder:WestviewPress.                    
       Gibson,W.(1984)Neuromancer.NewYork:Penguin.           
       Graham, S. (2005) ‘Software-SortedGeographies’, Progressin Human Geography
       29(5):1^19.                                           
       Hier, S. (2003) ‘Probing the Surveillant Assemblage: On the Dialectics of
       Surveillance Practices as Processes of Social Control’, Surveillance & Society
       1(3):399^411.                                         
       Koppel, M., S. Argamon and A. Shimoni (2002) ‘Automatically Categorizing
       WrittenTextsbyAuthorGender’,LitLinguistComputing17(4):401^412.
       Lessig,L.(2006)Code:Version2.0.NewYork:BasicBooks.    
       Lomell,H.M.(2004)‘TargetingtheUnwanted:VideoSurveillanceandCategorical
       ExclusioninOslo,Norway’,SurveillanceStudies2(2/3).    
       Lyon,D.(2003a)SurveillanceAfterSeptember11.Cambridge:Polity.
       Lyon, D. (2003b) Surveillance as Social Sorting: Privacy, Risk and Digital
       Discrimination.NewYork:Routledge.                     
       Macey, D. (2009) ‘Rethinking Biopolitics, Race and Power in the Wake of
       Foucault’,Theory,Culture&Society26(6):186^205.        
       McNay, L. (2009) ‘Self as Enterprise: Dilemmas of Control and Resistance in
       Foucault’s TheBirthofBiopolitics’,Theory,Culture&Society26(6):55^77.
       Mosco,V.(1996)ThePoliticalEconomyofCommunication.London:SAGE.
       Nakamura, L. (2002) Cybertypes: Race, Ethnicity, and Identity on the Internet.
       NewYork:Routledge.                                    
       Nye,J.(2002)‘SoftPower’,ForeignPolicy80:153^171.      
       Quantcast Corporation (2008) ‘Quantcast Methodology Overview: Delivering an
       Actionable Audience Service’. Available at: http://www.quantcast.com/white-
       papers/quantcast-methodology.pdf(consultedFebruary2010).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                         Cheney-Lippold^ANewAlgorithmicIdentity 181
                                                             
         Revel, J. (2009) ‘Identity, Nature, Life: Three Biopolitical Deconstructions’,
         Theory,Culture&Society26(6):45^54.                  
         Rose, N. (1996) Inventing Ourselves: Psychology, Power and Personhood.
         Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress.                 
         Rose, N. (1999) Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. Cambridge:
         CambridgeUniversityPress.                           
         Rose, N. (2000) ‘Government and Control’,The British Journal of Criminology
         40:321^339.                                         
         Sunstein,C.(2007)Republic2.0.Princeton:PrincetonUniversityPress.
         Thacker, E. (2004) ‘Foreword: Protocol is as Protocol Does’, in Protocol: How
         Control Exists After Decentralization, ed. A. Galloway. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press.                                              
         Thrift,N.(2005)KnowingCapitalism.ThousandOaks,CA:SAGE.
         Turrow, J. (2006) Niche Envy: Marketing Discrimination in the Digital Age.
         Cambridge,MA:MITPress.                              
         Weber, I. and C. Castillo (2010) ‘The Demographics of Web Search’, Proceedings
         of 2010 Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval
         (SIGIR).                                            
         Webster,W. (2009) ‘CCTV Policy in the UK: Reconsidering the Evidence Base’,
         SurveillanceStudies6(1):10^22.                      
         Witten, I. and E. Frank (2005) Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools
         andTechniques.SanFrancisco:MorganKaufmann.          
         Yankelovich, D. and D. Meer (2006) ‘Rediscovering Market Segmentation’,
         HarvardBusinessReview1).                            
         Zadeh,L.(1994)‘WhatIsBISC?’. Availableat:http.cs.berkeley.edu/projects/Bisc/
         bisc.welcome.html(consultedSeptember2010).          
         John Cheney-Lippold is Assistant Professor of American Culture at the
         Universityof Michigan. [email: jchl@umich.edu]      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             