[PAGE 1]
 1379790                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251379790Theory, Culture & SocietyD’Cruz
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       What  Demarcates                        2026, Vol. 43(2) 3 –20
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Necropolitics from  Biopolitics?                      
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       A Foucauldian  Critique of         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153137799779900
       Mbembe                              journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
                                                             
       Leonard D’Cruz                                        
       University of Melbourne                               
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Achille Mbembe presents ‘necropolitics’ as a corrective to Foucault’s conception of
       biopolitics, which Mbembe argues is insufficient to account for the contemporary
       politics of death. However, it is not clear that Mbembe succeeds in (a) demonstrating
       the deficiencies of Foucault’s framework or (b) demarcating necropolitics from
       biopolitics. In this article, I argue that Mbembe misconstrues Foucault’s understanding
       of the relationship between biopower and sovereign power, and thus underestimates
       Foucault’s capacity to account for racialized violence. On this basis, I suggest that the
       essence of necropolitics is already captured by Foucault’s concepts of State racism and
       thanatopolitics, and that Mbembe is wrong to suggest that ‘necropower’ constitutes a
       modality of power in its own right. Nonetheless, I maintain that Mbembe’s work has
       value in bringing certain effects of power into focus, as evidenced by his insights into the
       creation of ‘death-worlds’ and the racialized category of ‘the living dead’.
       Keywords                                              
       biopolitics, necropolitics, Foucault, Mbembe, State racism, death-worlds, the living
       dead                                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       Achille Mbembe presents ‘necropolitics’ as a corrective to Foucault’s conception of
       biopolitics, which Mbembe argues is insufficient to account for the contemporary poli-
       tics of death. While Mbembe’s work has certainly been influential, it is not clear that he
       succeeds in (a) demonstrating the deficiencies of Foucault’s framework or (b) demar-
       cating necropolitics from biopolitics. In this article, I argue that Mbembe’s articulation
       of necropolitics lacks conceptual clarity and is predicated on a fundamental misreading
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Leonard D’Cruz. Email: leonard.dcruz@unimelb.edu.au
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
       Correction (March 2026): Capitalisation of the word “State” in the phrase “state racism”.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                               Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      of Foucault’s work. More specifically, I show that Mbembe misconstrues Foucault’s
      understanding of the relationship between biopower and sovereign power, and thus
      underestimates Foucault’s capacity to account for racialized violence. This leaves
      Mbembe’s framework in need of conceptual reconstruction, and raises important ques-
      tions about how his work should be operationalized to analyse contemporary socio-
      political phenomena. Ultimately, I suggest that ‘necropower’ is best conceptualized as
      the convergence of biological racism and sovereign power. On this basis, I suggest that
      the essence of necropolitics is already captured by Foucault’s concepts of State racism
      and thanatopolitics, and that Mbembe is wrong to suggest that ‘necropower’ constitutes
      a modality of power in its own right. For these reasons, I argue that Mbembe ultimately
      fails to demarcate necropolitics from biopolitics. Nonetheless, I maintain that Mbembe’s
      work has value in bringing certain effects of power into focus, as evidenced by his
      insights into the creation of ‘death-worlds’ and the racialized category of ‘the living
      dead’.                                                 
        This article is divided into three sections. The first section focuses on Mbembe’s cri-
      tique of Foucault, and shows that it is based on a fundamental misunderstanding of
      Foucault’s notion of biopower and its relationship to State racism. In the second section,
      I critically examine Mbembe’s notion of necropower, and argue that it does not constitute
      a distinct modality of power. Furthermore, I argue that recent attempts to demarcate nec-
      ropolitics from biopolitics in the secondary literature have been unsuccessful. In the third
      section, I outline how Mbembe’s concepts of death-worlds and the living dead should be
      reflexively operationalized within Foucault’s broader framework of biopolitics.
      Biopower, Sovereign Power, and State Racism: Correcting
      Mbembe’s Misreading of Foucault                        
      Mbembe’s work has been challenged for several reasons, with most critics focusing on
      his seminal essay collection On the Postcolony (Mbembe, 2001 [2000]). This includes
      charges that Mbembe is excessively pessimistic about the condition of post-colonial
      Africa and the prospects for effective resistance (Abrahamsen, 2003: 208–9; Karlström,
      2003; Weate, 2003: 36–9). Additionally, some readers have suggested that his work is
      theoretically confused, structured by unconscious gender bias, or even underestimates
      the centrality of anti-black racism and slavery to the historical development of biopoli-
      tics (Butler, 1992: 70–3; Sexton, 2010: 32–9; Weate, 2003: 27–32, 38–9). However,
      critics have rarely questioned the distinctiveness of necropolitics as a conceptual frame-
      work, especially in relation to Foucault’s work. This is precisely the issue this article
      aims to address.                                       
        At the outset, it is important to clarify Foucault’s notion of biopower and how it func-
      tions within his broader framework of biopolitics.1 This is crucial in evaluating whether
      Mbembe’s critique and subsequent extension of Foucault’s framework are successful. I
      will argue that many of the supposed deficiencies that Mbembe identifies in Foucault’s
      work are actually the result of misunderstandings or outright misrepresentations.
      Mbembe’s misreading of Foucault is based on two distinct but related mistakes. First,
      Mbembe conflates Foucault’s understanding of biopower with Agamben’s appropriation
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         5      
                                                             
       of the concept. For this reason, Mbembe fails to recognize the key distinction that
       Foucault draws between sovereign power and biopower. Second, Mbembe mischaracter-
       izes Foucault’s account of State racism. This mischaracterization stems both from his
       aforementioned conflation of Foucault and Agamben’s conceptions of biopower, and
       from a lack of attention to Foucault’s genealogy of State racism in Society Must Be
       Defended.                                             
        Mbembe concludes the title essay in Necropolitics by claiming to have shown ‘that
       the notion of biopower is insufficient to account for contemporary forms of the subjuga-
       tion of life to the power of death’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 92). However, there is a seri-
       ous lack of conceptual clarity surrounding Mbembe’s treatment of biopower itself. He
       begins the essay with a discussion of sovereignty:    
        The ultimate expression of sovereignty largely resides in the power and capacity to dictate who
        is able to live and who must die. To kill or to let live thus constitutes sovereignty’s limits, its
        principal attributes. To be sovereign is to exert one’s control over mortality and to define life as
        the deployment and manifestation of power. (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 66)
       This claim is unobjectionable in itself and consistent with Foucault’s own definition of
       sovereign power. However, Mbembe writes immediately after: ‘This sums up what
       Michel Foucault meant by biopower: that domain of life over which power has asserted
       its control’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 66). This is not an accurate representation of
       Foucault’s view. Foucault does not define biopower as the domain of life over which
       sovereignty asserts control. Rather, he describes it as a historically distinct modality of
       power that conceives of life in sociobiological terms and employs techniques of power
       that attempt to regulate biological life at the level of the population (Foucault, 1978
       [1976]: 134–45).2 In this way, Foucauldian biopolitics examines techniques of power
       that are historically specific and, most importantly, distinct from the techniques of sov-
       ereign power. Indeed, in The Will to Knowledge, Foucault describes biopower as acting
       upon life through ‘continuous regulatory and corrective mechanisms’ and explicitly
       claims that it is not ‘a matter of bringing death into play in the field of sovereignty, but
       of distributing the living in the domain of value and utility’ (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 144).
       In this way, biopower is not simply one more manifestation of sovereign power, but a
       modality of power in its own right. As we will see shortly, Foucault thinks biopower and
       sovereign power interact in complex and significant ways, but maintains that they should
       be conceptualized as distinct modalities of power (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 144; 2003
       [1997]: 254–6).                                       
        Mbembe’s confusion stems from his tendency to conflate Foucault’s understanding of
       biopower with Agamben’s appropriation of the concept. Whereas Foucault sees biopower
       as fundamentally distinct from sovereign power, Agamben conceives of biopower as
       inscribed within the logic of sovereignty itself. Agamben famously positions his Homo
       Sacer project as an effort to correct or, at least, complete Foucault’s account of biopolitics
       (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 9). For Agamben, sovereignty always already exercises power
       over life. Agamben draws on the Ancient Greek distinction between two different types of
       life. The first is bios, which refers to ‘the form or way of living proper to an individual or a
       group’ (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 1). The second is zoē, which denotes ‘the simple fact of
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                               Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      living common to all living beings’ (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 1). According to Agamben,
      sovereignty exercises power over life insofar as it is always capable of reducing forms of
      life endowed with political rights (bios) to the status of what he calls ‘bare life’ – a condi-
      tion in which one has been stripped of their rights and the dignity associated with them
      (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 8–10). However, bare life is not a total reduction to animal life
      (zoē) insofar as the exclusion of the individual from the political community paradoxically
      includes them within the system of sovereign power through the very process of exclusion.
      This leads Agamben to argue that ‘the production of a biopolitical body is the original
      activity of sovereign power’ (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 6). For Agamben, this is because the
      power to exclude – or to decide on the ‘state of exception’ in which rights and the rule of
      law are suspended – is inherently a form of power over life (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 6–9).
        Therefore, we can see that the term ‘biopower’ denotes at least two distinct forms of
      power. For Agamben, it refers to the way that power over life is inscribed in the frame-
      work of sovereignty itself, and, for him, biopower serves as a fundamental category of
      Western ontology (see Koopman, 2015: 574). On the other hand, Foucault conceives of
      biopower as a historically limited modality of power that targets life in specifically
      sociobiological terms. Much has been written about the relative merits of each concept
      and the extent to which Foucault’s work actually needs the supposed correction offered
      by Agamben, at least at a conceptual level.3 However, the crucial question for my pur-
      poses is which of these conceptions of biopower Mbembe is ultimately working with.
      After all, one might think that Mbembe is principally citing Foucault in his essay, but
      really basing his work on Agamben’s notion of biopower. Indeed, Sexton charitably
      characterizes Mbembe’s necropolitics as a ‘rewriting of Agamben’s rewriting of
      Foucault’s biopolitics’ (Sexton, 2010: 38). According to Sexton, ‘necropolitics is impor-
      tant for the historicist project of provincializing Agamben’s paradigmatic analysis, espe-
      cially as it articulates the logic of race as something far more global than a conflict
      internal to Europe (or even Eurasia)’ (Sexton, 2010: 32). Sexton is certainly right to
      highlight that Mbembe interprets Foucault’s work through Agamben. However, I argue
      that Mbembe’s focus on the racialized politics of death makes his work directly account-
      able to the biopolitical framework developed by Foucault.
        This is clear in Mbembe’s essay, where he explicitly picks up on the biological and
      racial dimensions of Foucault’s concept. Later in the text, Mbembe offers a more accu-
      rate – but still incorrect – definition of Foucauldian biopower that emphasizes the socio-
      biological theme:                                      
        Biopower, in Foucault’s work, appears to function by dividing people into those who must live
        and those who must die. As it proceeds on the basis of a split between the living and the dead,
        such power defines itself in relation to the biological field – of which it takes control and in
        which it invests itself. This control presupposes a distribution of human species into groups, a
        subdivision of the population into subgroups, and the establishment of a biological caesura
        between these subgroups. Foucault refers to this using the seemingly familiar term ‘racism’.
        (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 71)                            
      This passage is useful in further correcting Mbembe’s misreading of Foucault. The main
      problem is that it does not actually match Foucault’s definition of biopower. Strictly
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         7      
                                                             
       speaking, biopower does not divide people into ‘those who must live and those who must
       die’ – at least, not in the first instance. Indeed, this formulation confuses Foucault’s con-
       ception of biopower with his more specific concept of State racism. In Foucault’s broader
       framework of biopolitics, State racism refers to the way sovereign power combines with
       biopower to maximize the health of one race by eliminating the supposed biological
       threat posed by another (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 254–8). For Foucault, sovereign power
       is defined by ‘the right to take life or let live’ (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 241). On the other
       hand, he claims biopower is defined by ‘the right to make live and to let die’ (Foucault,
       2003 [1997]: 241).                                    
        In this way, biopower is a modality of power that ‘exerts a positive influence on life’
       and ‘that endeavors to administer, optimize, and multiply it’ by ‘subjecting it to precise
       controls and comprehensive regulations’ (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 137). Biopower, then,
       does not inherently divide people into those who must live and those who must die, but
       initially only tries to protect and enhance the health of the population (Foucault, 1978
       [1976]: 139; Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 239–54). According to Foucault, this process cer-
       tainly does involve the differential valuation of life (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 144).
       However, in the first instance, this merely serves as a motivation ‘to “make” live and
       “let” die’ or, to use another of Foucault’s formulations, ‘to foster life or disallow it to the
       point of death’ (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 241; 1978 [1976]: 138). By contrast, for Foucault,
       the power to make live and make die simultaneously only emerges through the superim-
       position of sovereign power and biopower, which manifests in the form of State racism
       (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 254–8).                       
        To fully grasp what Foucault means by ‘State racism’, we first need to clarify his
       understanding of ‘racism’ more generally. In Society Must Be Defended, Foucault devel-
       ops a genealogy of racism that makes important distinctions between three different
       terms: ‘race war’, ‘racism’, and ‘State racism’. For Foucault, the term ‘race war’ or ‘race
       struggle’ refers to the 16th and 17th-century European discourse that conceives of soci-
       ety as a conflict between different social groups – a conflict that endures even under
       conditions of peace and order (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 43–81). By contrast, Foucault
       thinks we should reserve the term ‘racism’ for a very specific historical transformation of
       this earlier discourse of race war (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 241). According to Foucault,
       this newer ‘racism’ is ‘far removed from the ordinary racism that takes the traditional
       form of mutual contempt or hatred between races’ and is only ‘born at the point when the
       theme of racial purity replaces that of race struggle’ (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 241). Indeed,
       Foucault thinks this ‘racism’ is best described as a ‘reworking’ of this earlier discourse in
       ‘sociobiological terms’ and that it was designed to serve ‘the purposes of social con-
       servatism and, at least in a certain number of cases, colonial domination’ (Foucault, 2003
       [1997]: 241). In other words, it is what we would today call ‘scientific racism’ or ‘bio-
       logical racism’.                                      
        The transformation of race war into biological racism is the condition of possibility
       for the third notion, which is the one of greatest relevance to my discussion: State racism.
       Foucault defines State racism as the centralization of biological racism within the state
       apparatus (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 82). For Foucault, State racism is a form of racism that
       society directs ‘against itself, against its own elements and its own products. This is the
       internal racism of permanent purification’ (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 63). In this way,

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                               Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      Foucault suggests that biological racism enacts a significant transformation in the way
      sovereign power is exercised, insofar as the sovereign right to kill now functions through
      and is justified by biopolitical considerations around the health of the supposedly domi-
      nant race (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 241, 254–8). In other words, Foucault argues that
      modern sovereign power has increasingly come to function through a racist biopolitical
      governmentality:4                                      
        In the biopower system . . . killing or the imperative to kill is acceptable only if it results not in
        a victory over political adversaries, but in the elimination of the biological threat to and the
        improvement of the species or race. There is a direct connection between the two. In a
        normalizing society, race or racism is the precondition that makes killing acceptable. (Foucault,
        2003 [1997]: 256)                                    
      Strictly speaking, then, Mbembe is right to say that biopower – in the narrow sense of a
      specific modality of power – is insufficient to account for the politics of death. However,
      the same cannot be said for Foucauldian biopolitics as a broader conceptual framework,
      and thus Mbembe’s critique of Foucault fails at a conceptual level. After all, Foucault
      does not actually attempt to account for the racialized politics of death through the con-
      cept of biopower per se, but rather through the concept of State racism – that is to say, the
      way the sovereign right to kill is exercised within a racist biopolitical governmentality.
                                                             
      There Is No Such Thing as ‘Necropower’: The Deficiencies
      of Necropolitics as a Conceptual Framework             
                                                             
      All this casts doubt on the supposed deficiencies of Foucault’s framework for accounting
      for the racialized politics of death. By the same token, this clarification of Foucault’s
      work should lead us to question what is distinctive or original about Mbembe’s notion of
      necropower and his broader framework of necropolitics.5 Indeed, I argue that the basic
      insights of this framework – at least, at a conceptual level – are already covered by
      Foucault’s notions of State racism and thanatopolitics. Of course, several critics have
      defended necropower as a distinctive modality of power. According to Duarte, necropo-
      wer can be distinguished from biopower insofar as it ‘implies the intensive production of
      mass-scale deaths through planned and calculated actions and discourses’ (Duarte, 2023:
      59). Similarly, Rafael suggests that necropower is ‘the other, enabling side of biopower’
      that serves as ‘the murderous counterpoint to the biopolitical imperative of administering
      life’ (Rafael, 2022: 65). Both formulations seem to cohere with Mbembe’s own under-
      standing of the concept (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 92). However, as I will demonstrate, this
      is precisely why they are unsuccessful in showing that necropower is distinct from bio-
      power. Mbembe’s most cogent presentation of necropolitics comes at the end of his
      essay:                                                 
        . . . I have put forward the notion of necropolitics, or necropower, to account for the various
        ways in which, in our contemporary world, weapons are deployed in the interest of maximally
        destroying persons and creating death-worlds, that is, new and unique forms of social existence
        in which vast populations are subjected to living conditions that confer upon them the status of
        the living dead. (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 92)           
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         9      
                                                             
       From this passage, we can see that Mbembe identifies necropower with techniques of
       sovereign power such as military force and the right to kill. In a different part of the
       essay, he also emphasizes the sovereign technique of territorialization (Mbembe, 2019
       [2016]: 79–83). Of course, for Mbembe, the use of these techniques of sovereign power
       is guided and augmented by biological racism, which is obviously connected to tech-
       niques of biopower such as population measurement and normalization (Foucault, 1978
       [1976]: 139–46; Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 243–5). In other words, necropower is really just
       the superimposition of sovereign power and biopower. At this point, it becomes clear that
       there is actually no such thing as ‘necropower’ insofar as it lacks any novel techniques of
       power that are genuinely its own. Indeed, my contention is that necropower is simply the
       exercise of sovereign power through the prism of a racist biopolitical governmentality. In
       this way, it is nothing more than a new label for a phenomenon already identified within
       Foucault’s framework of biopolitics: namely, State racism.
        Mbembe’s emphasis on the connection between racism and techniques of sovereign
       power can be seen in his analysis of colonialism. According to Mbembe, early modern
       colonial occupation ‘consisted in seizing, delimiting, and asserting control over a geo-
       graphical area – of writing a new set of social and spatial relations on the ground’
       (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 79). Mbembe refers to this process of writing new spatial rela-
       tions as ‘territorialization’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 79). According to Mbembe, this pro-
       cess operates through ‘the exercise of sovereignty’ but in a way that is guided by racism
       (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 79). After all, ‘territory’ is one of the paradigmatic techniques of
       sovereign power (see Foucault, 2009 [2004]: 64–5). A major highlight of Mbembe’s
       essay is his discussion of how the ‘late modern colonial occupation’ of Gaza and the
       West Bank differs from early modern colonial techniques of territorialization. Indeed, he
       explores how these occupations are characterized by ‘three major characteristics’: verti-
       cal sovereignty, splintering occupation, and infrastructural warfare (Mbembe, 2019
       [2016]: 80–3). These empirical insights are profoundly valuable, but all of them operate
       at the level of historical detail rather than conceptual innovation. Ultimately, all three of
       these developments can be accounted for as techniques of sovereign power that have
       been employed within a racist biopolitical governmentality, which now aims at inflicting
       death and destruction to the advantage of the privileged racial group. This same basic
       logic can also be seen at play in other death-worlds that Mbembe discusses in the essay,
       such as the plantation, the concentration camp, and the contemporary warzone.
        If there is no such thing as necropower, this raises difficult questions about what is left
       of Mbembe’s broader framework of necropolitics. Setting aside the supposedly distinc-
       tive techniques of ‘necropower’, there have been several other efforts to demarcate nec-
       ropolitics from biopolitics among those who have tried to operationalize Mbembe’s
       framework. Quinan and Thiele argue that necropolitics can be distinguished from biopol-
       itics insofar as death has, at least in certain contexts, overtaken life as the main target of
       power. They claim that necropolitics:                 
        . . . is much more concerned with how life is subjugated to the power of death. Thus, rather
        than showing how life and death are both structuring instruments of power (as if in a relation of
        equivalence), necropolitics asks about the asymmetrical conditioning of who gets to live and
        who must die. While Foucault keeps a certain conceptual distance, Mbembe emphasizes that
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
        they are no longer an even pair. Death, making die, is what structures living. (Quinan and
        Thiele, 2020: 3)                                     
      However, this attempt to demarcate necropolitics from biopolitics is inadequate. After
      all, Foucault does not claim that life and death are always an ‘even pair’ within the
      broader framework of biopolitics. This is clearest in Part Five of The Will to Knowledge,
      where Foucault examines how biopower has fundamentally transformed the sovereign
      right to kill (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 134–59). Foucault claims that ‘the right of life and
      death is a dissymmetrical one’ within both ancient and modern forms of sovereign power
      (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 136). According to Foucault, the pre-biopolitical sovereign
      ‘exercised his right to life only by exercising his right to kill’ and therefore this supposed
      ‘power of life and death’ was nothing more than ‘the right to take life or let live’ (Foucault,
      1978 [1976]: 136). By contrast, biopower exercises power over life insofar as it attempts
      to administer, optimize, and multiply it, and thus is also dissymmetrical insofar as it tries
      to produce and protect life while minimizing death (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 137).
      However, Foucault argues that modern sovereign power has been fundamentally altered
      by the advent of productive forms of power such as biopower (Foucault, 1978 [1976]:
      136–7; 2003 [1997]: 241, 254–6). This leads him to claim that with these new forms of
      power, there has also ‘been a parallel shift in the right of death, or at least a tendency to
      align itself with the exigencies of a life-administering power and to define itself accord-
      ingly’ (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 136). This is precisely why, for Foucault, modern sover-
      eign power should be understood as an especially ‘formidable power of death’ that is the
      ‘counterpart’ to the productive modality of biopower (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 137). In a
      1982 lecture in Vermont, Foucault refers to the deadly counterpart of biopolitics as ‘than-
      atopolitics’ – that is to say, a politics concerned with the maximization of death within a
      broadly biopolitical governmentality (Foucault, 2000 [1988]: 416).6
        Duarte defends a reformulated version of Quinan and Thiele’s argument, suggesting
      that ‘necropolitical powers operate by reverting the priorities between life and death in
      order to better favor death’ (Duarte, 2023: 60). According to Duarte, the ‘exercise of
      necropolitical powers’ reduces the importance of the ‘distinction between life and death’
      insofar as death is ‘transformed into an end in itself’ (Breu, 2020: 505; Deutscher, 2017:
      103; Duarte, 2023: 60; Islekel, 2022: 3; cf. Puar, 2007: 33). Similarly, Deutscher sug-
      gests that necropolitics ‘is not necessarily subordinated to the putative “vital” ends asso-
      ciated with biopolitical direct and indirect murder’ (Deutscher, 2017: 103).7 For
      Deutscher, this is what distinguishes necropolitics from Foucault’s notion of thanatopoli-
      tics (Deutscher, 2017: 103). I argue that these claims are also mistaken. After all, biologi-
      cal racism – and related forms of biopolitical discrimination based on theories of
      ‘abnormality’ or ‘degeneracy’ – are critical to understanding the contemporary politics of
      death, and these forms of discrimination presuppose one population whose life must be
      preserved and another population that must be subjected to death (Foucault, 2003 [1997]:
      255). Mbembe himself states that ‘to a large extent, racism is the driver of the necropo-
      litical principle insofar as it stands for organized destruction’ and ‘a sacrificial economy’
      that relies on ‘a generalized cheapening of the price of life’ and ‘a habituation to loss’
      (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 38). In this way, the racialized politics of death exercises power
      over life based on a distinction between lives that are considered valuable and lives that
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         11     
                                                             
       are determined to be worthless. Therefore, the racialized logic of necropolitics would
       lose all coherence without this emphasis on the preservation of a certain kind of life.
       Indeed, when it comes to the question of race, neither life nor death can be given absolute
       priority over the other or, as Duarte claims of death, made into ‘an end in itself’. After
       all, each concept already presupposes the other through the differential valuation of life.
       Without this differential valuation of life predicated on preserving one population at the
       expense of another, it is hard to see any clear motivation for the maximization of death.
       Therefore, the supposed shift in emphasis made by Mbembe has been greatly overstated
       and does not indicate anything truly novel in his work at a conceptual level.
       Mbembe’s Conceptual Innovations: The Analytical Value of
       Death-Worlds and the Living Dead                      
                                                             
       So far, I have argued that Mbembe’s conceptual framework of necropolitics cannot be
       successfully demarcated from Foucauldian biopolitics. However, Mbembe does make
       important contributions to the framework of biopolitics, and offers genuine correctives
       to Foucault’s work at an empirical level. Mbembe rightly highlights Foucault’s relative
       lack of attention to colonialism and slavery – which are, of course, two extremely impor-
       tant chapters in the historical development of biological racism (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]:
       76).8 Furthermore, Mbembe does offer two genuinely original concepts through his
       notions of death-worlds and the living dead (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 92). At a basic level,
       the idea of death-worlds helps to frame the diverse ways in which racialized violence
       manifests within different contexts and interacts with sovereign power, while the cate-
       gory of the living dead helps to conceptualize the specific kinds of political exclusion
       that derive from biological racism. Admittedly, these concepts are only explicitly named
       at the very end of Mbembe’s essay, and thus do not receive as much conceptual develop-
       ment as they require to be made truly distinctive and convincing. Nonetheless, these
       ideas are useful insofar as they extend or thematize elements already present in Foucault’s
       analysis. In this way, they allow us to generate and better organize certain empirical
       insights.                                             
        Mbembe defines death-worlds as ‘new and unique forms of social existence in which
       vast populations are subjected to living conditions that confer upon them the status of the
       living dead’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 92). Mbembe discusses five specific types of death-
       worlds: the plantation, the concentration camp, the late modern colony, the system of
       apartheid, and the contemporary warzone. I argue that this concept is extremely useful in
       capturing the singularity of each of these contexts. After all, the relationship between
       sovereign power, biopower, and racialized violence is constituted differently in each
       case. In particular, the concept of death-worlds helps to frame Mbembe’s insights into
       the way biological racism shapes political violence that exceeds sovereign power.
       Furthermore, this notion is useful in conceptualizing the specific forms of violence that
       characterize (post-)colonial contexts, especially those of post-colonial Africa. Indeed,
       Mbembe’s work succeeds in bridging the conceptual framework of biopolitics with the
       traditions of postcolonialism and Afropessimism (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 78–83, 161–3;
       Patterson, 1982: viii–ix; Sexton, 2010; Wilderson, 2010).9 On this front, one instructive
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      example is his analysis of apartheid in South Africa, which provides a wealth of insight
      into precisely how sovereign power was exercised both within a specific post-colonial
      African context and through a racist biopolitical governmentality (Mbembe, 2019
      [2016]: 79–80). However, perhaps his most original contribution concerns the relation-
      ship between biological racism and organized non-state violence. As Rouse rightly
      argues, Mbembe’s work is extremely valuable in theorizing the role of non-state actors
      in the constitution of specific death-worlds (Rouse, 2021: 362–3). Mbembe offers two
      main examples of non-state actors in his essay: what he terms ‘war machines’ and suicide
      bombers (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 83–92).                  
        For Mbembe, war machines ‘are made up of segments of armed men that split up or
      merge with one another, depending on the tasks to be carried out and the circumstances
      involved’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 85). According to Mbembe, this concept is especially
      useful in understanding the singularity of post-colonialism in Africa (Mbembe, 2019
      [2016]: 84–7). He rightly argues that in Africa, ‘the political economy of statehood dra-
      matically changed over the last quarter of the twentieth century’ and that ‘many African
      states can no longer claim to hold a monopoly on violence or on the means of coercion
      within their territory’ (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 85–7). In terms of examples of war
      machines, Mbembe cites ‘urban militias, private armies, armies of regional lords, private
      security firms, and state armies’ which ‘all claim the right to exercise violence or to kill’
      (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 84). Speaking in this broad context of post-colonial Africa,
      Mbembe writes:                                         
        Increasingly, war is no longer waged between the armies of two sovereign states but between
        armed groups that act behind the mask of the state against armed groups that have no state but
        control very distinct territories, with both sides having as their main targets civilian populations
        that are unarmed or organized into militias. (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 87)
      Although Mbembe’s essay does not make this point sufficiently clear, it is important to
      acknowledge that the targeting of civilian populations in such contexts is guided by dis-
      tinctly biological forms of racism. Mamdani has shown how genocidal violence in places
      like Rwanda and the Darfur region of Sudan has been shaped by the categories of bio-
      logical racism introduced by European colonialism (Mamdani, 2001: 9–14, 76–102;
      2009: 145–70). Indeed, the relevant racial divisions in both conflicts are unintelligible
      without the colonial ‘master categories’ of ‘race’ and ‘tribe’ that were used to classify,
      divide, and regulate the colonized population (Mamdani, 2009: 146; 2012: 46–53).
      Genocidal violence in these contexts was subsequently rationalized on the basis of these
      racialized categories. For example, Mamdani argues the Rwandan genocide needs to be
      understood as what he refers to as a ‘natives’ genocide’ – that is to say, a genocide in
      which one racial group attempts to exterminate another based on the latter’s perceived
      identity as colonial settlers (Mamdani, 2001: 13–14). As he rightly explains, the militias
      of Hutu extremists rationalized their genocide against the Tutsi minority by constructing
      them ‘as a privileged alien settler presence’ (Mamdani, 2001: 14). This construction was
      made on the basis of the racialized distinction between Hutu and Tutsi originally estab-
      lished by Belgian colonialism, which ‘constructed Hutu as indigenous Bantu and Tutsi
      as alien Hamites’ (Mamdani, 2001: 16). In this way, we can see that genocidal practices
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         13     
                                                             
       in such contexts are heavily informed by the racist biopolitical logic of protecting one
       population by eliminating another, and that this logic is inextricably linked to the biologi-
       cal racism that was created by the West and developed in the colonies (Foucault, 2003
       [1997]: 103, 257).                                    
        Mbembe’s second example of a non-state actor is that of the suicide bomber, which he
       discusses in the specific context of the colonial occupation of Palestine (Mbembe, 2019
       [2016]: 88). For Mbembe, the suicide bomber is a figure who raises a series of complex
       questions about freedom, terror, resistance, sacrifice, and redemption (Mbembe, 2019
       [2016]: 88–92). However, for my purposes, the most important characteristic of this
       figure is that it represents a form of political violence that is shaped by biological racism
       but exceeds the technology of sovereign power. At this point, one might wonder whether
       Mbembe’s emphasis on racialized non-state violence might be sufficient to demarcate
       necropolitics from biopolitics at a conceptual level. After all, it might appear that these
       examples are not covered by Foucault’s notion of State racism.
        The challenge, then, is to show that these examples of racialized non-state violence
       can be accounted for within Foucault’s broader framework. Of course, Foucault’s work
       is empirically limited insofar as it does not provide a detailed historical explanation of
       how State racism has diffused biological racism throughout the social body. As we have
       already seen in the case of Rwanda, this is essential to an adequate description of racism
       in colonial and post-colonial contexts, especially when it comes to racialized forms of
       violence that are exercised by non-state actors. Nonetheless, Foucault’s existing frame-
       work is sufficient to account for such violence at a conceptual level. Indeed, we can
       account for non-state war machines claiming the sovereign right to kill without making
       any dramatic revisions to Foucault’s framework. At the level of historical detail, this
       involves extending Foucault’s analysis of biological racism and its relationship to state
       power. More specifically, it requires complicating our understanding of the relationship
       between non-state actors, the biological racism that frequently guides them, and their
       relationship to state power. After all, while militias are non-state actors, they do appropri-
       ate the sovereign right to kill by claiming territory and declaring themselves the supreme
       authority – or, at least, representatives of the supreme authority. In this way, non-state
       war machines are easily classified as actors who deploy sovereign power within a racist
       biopolitical governmentality, but without necessarily attaining the status or broader func-
       tions of a state.                                     
        On the other hand, suicide bombers do not operate through techniques of sovereign
       power such as military warfare or territorialization. Instead, as Mbembe observes, they
       transform their bodies into weapons and, in the process, erase the ordinary distinction
       between suicide and homicide (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 88–9). However, insofar as suicide
       bombings are a form of resistance, they are a form that is deeply structured by their rela-
       tionship to sovereign power. After all, they are motivated by a logic of martyrdom that
       assumes they are trapped in an asymmetrical conflict with a sovereign power – and, in the
       case of the colonial occupation of Palestine, one that is based on a differential and pro-
       foundly racialized valuation of life. Of course, there is often a religious dimension to this
       sacrifice as well, epitomized by the promise of eternal life (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 89–90).
       However, the specific motivation for the sacrifice of suicide – rather than death on the bat-
       tlefield – is only rendered intelligible through an asymmetrical conflict with a sovereign

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      power that is guided by a racist biopolitical governmentality. Therefore, while the notion of
      death-worlds is useful for framing the singularity of the contexts in which such actors oper-
      ate, we simply do not need the conceptual framework of ‘necropolitics’ to cover this
      ground. In this way, I argue that Mbembe’s work does help to correct for the empirical and
      historical shortcomings of Foucault’s analysis, but that this amounts to an extension of
      Foucault’s framework rather than requiring the creation of an entirely new one.
        Mbembe’s second original concept is his notion of the living dead. This idea is useful
      in elaborating a distinctly racialized conception of political death, and in a way that
      exceeds Agamben’s notion of ‘bare life’. As Brennan has rightly argued, this difference
      is best understood through the theme of ‘sacrifice’ (Brennan, 2024: 5–9). At first glance,
      Mbembe’s conception of the living dead might appear to be a simple renaming of bare
      life and one that echoes Agamben’s own use of the term ‘the living dead’ (Agamben,
      1998 [1995]: 83; 1999 [1998]: 41, 44, 54). In this way, one might think Mbembe’s con-
      cept merely describes the way vulnerable populations are stripped of their political rights
      and thus unjustly exposed to insecurity, violence, and death. Agamben identifies his
      notion of bare life with the Roman figure of homo sacer – the accursed man who has
      been excluded from the political community and thus can be killed by anyone, but cannot
      be sacrificed in a religious ritual (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 83). In other words, it refers to
      an individual who is exposed to death, but in a way that means the significance of their
      death partially exists outside the system of sovereignty – although, as previously men-
      tioned, it is paradoxically reinscribed through this very exclusion.
        However, as Brennan correctly argues, Agamben’s notion of bare life is unable to
      adequately account for racialized forms of death and exclusion. Indeed, Brennan rightly
      claims that because Agamben understands bare life as ‘beyond sacrifice’, he also places
      this form of exclusion beyond relevant racial divisions that are bound up with the logic
      of sacrifice (Brennan, 2024: 5–7). This is clear within a racist biopolitical governmental-
      ity, where the supposedly inferior race is not simply reduced to ‘bare life’ but is desig-
      nated as a biological threat to the health and survival of the supposedly superior race. In
      this way, the racialized subject of death is not, in Agamben’s terminology, the ‘absolute
      biopolitical substance’ of bare life that is apparently excluded from the political com-
      munity (Agamben, 1999 [1998]: 156–7). Rather, as Foucault’s notion of State racism has
      shown in the context of modernity, the destruction of a racial group is intended to pre-
      serve the health and purity of a supposedly superior racial population (Foucault, 2003
      [1997]: 255–7). Therefore, in some important sense, the supposedly inferior population
      is ostensibly being sacrificed for the preservation of the supposedly superior one. This
      makes it a form of life that must not only be excluded from the political community, but
      must also be positively eliminated within the sacrificial logic of State racism. As Brennan
      rightly notes, this notion of racialized sacrifice is based on a ‘weak’ sense of ‘sacrifice’
      in which something is destroyed in the interest of preserving something else (Brennan,
      2024: 8). This contrasts with the ‘strong’ sense of sacrifice as ‘tragic expenditure and
      conscious offerings in the production of the sacred’ (Brennan, 2024: 8). Nonetheless, the
      weaker sense of sacrifice is crucial in understanding the racialized politics of death
      (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 38).                             
        Yet one might still wonder if this racialized conception of the living dead is already
      present in Agamben’s work. After all, in Remnants of Auschwitz, he does acknowledge

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         15     
                                                             
       that the Muselmann is a distinctly racialized form of bare life (Agamben, 1999 [1998]:
       54, 156–7). Of course, Agamben is right to emphasize that the Nazis dehumanized
       Jewish victims of the Holocaust through the attribution of an undesirable ‘demographic,
       ethnic, national, and political identity’ (Agamben, 1999 [1998]: 156–7). However, he
       underplays how this process is motivated by the desire to protect the health and purity of
       one racial group by sacrificing another. Therefore, Agamben’s approach does not prop-
       erly account for the racialized sacrifice that is integral to the genocidal logic of State
       racism (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 255–7; Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 137). This is precisely the
       logic that underpins Mbembe’s conception of the living dead and distinguishes it from
       Agamben’s treatment of the concept.                   
        This notion of racialized sacrifice also helps to dispel concerns that the concept of
       death-worlds is already covered by Agamben’s analysis of the concentration camp. For
       Agamben, the camp is the ‘“nomos” of the modern’ – that is to say, it is the site that
       embodies the ‘state of exception’ he takes as definitive of the modern juridico-political
       order (Agamben, 1998 [1995]: 166–9). Mbembe builds on this account by attending to
       ‘figures of sovereignty’ beyond the camp but that similarly aim at ‘the generalized instru-
       mentalization of human existence and the material destruction of human bodies and
       populations’ – that is to say, death-worlds like the plantation and the colony (Mbembe,
       2019 [2016]: 68). Beyond emphasizing the historical importance of these death-worlds
       in the constitution of the modern nomos, Mbembe’s concept explains how the state of
       exception actually results in the maximization of death and destruction (Mbembe, 2019
       [2016]: 92). Indeed, he rightly argues that biological racism is the primary cause behind
       this ‘sacrificial economy’ and is precisely what motivates the suspension of the rule of
       law within such contexts (Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 38). In this way, Mbembe shows how
       the state of exception functions through a racist biopolitical governmentality. In other
       words, he demonstrates that death-worlds are structured by a racialized form of sacrifice
       that exceeds a mere reduction to bare life.           
        The preceding discussion helps to clarify the value of Mbembe’s conceptual innova-
       tions and indicates how they should be reflexively operationalized. While these concepts
       do offer a genuine extension of Foucault’s framework, they do not exceed the basic logic
       laid down by Foucault. Therefore, they are best understood as immanent contributions to
       the framework of biopolitics, which, as I have argued, encompasses concepts like State
       racism and thanatopolitics. In this way, I suggest that death-worlds and the living dead
       are genuine conceptual innovations that can be operationalized within a biopolitical anal-
       ysis while leaving behind Mbembe’s proposed framework of necropolitics and his notion
       of necropower.                                        
       Conclusion                                            
       In this article, I have argued that Mbembe’s critique of Foucauldian biopolitics is predi-
       cated on a fundamental misreading of Foucault’s work. Relatedly, I have demonstrated
       that what Mbembe refers to as ‘necropower’ is already covered by Foucault’s concepts
       of State racism and thanatopolitics. I have also shown that subsequent attempts to demar-
       cate necropolitics from biopolitics in the secondary literature have been unsuccessful.
       This is because they overlook how the racialized politics of death is necessarily
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      conditioned by the differential valuation of life characteristic of biological racism.
      However, I maintain that Mbembe does offer a genuine extension of Foucault’s frame-
      work through his notions of death-worlds and the living dead.
      Acknowledgements                                       
                                                             
      I would like to thank the editorial board and three anonymous reviewers at Theory, Culture &
      Society for their helpful feedback on this article.    
      ORCID iD                                               
      Leonard D’Cruz https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1508-1566   
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. While Foucault generally uses the terms ‘biopower’ and ‘biopolitics’ interchangeably, I will
        use the term ‘biopower’ to refer to the specific modality of power that attempts to regulate
        life in sociobiological terms. Furthermore, I will use ‘biopolitics’ to denote Foucault’s overall
        conceptual framework that frames this specific modality of power, and thus encompasses
        the concepts of biopower, biological racism, State racism, and thanatopolitics. Similarly,
        Mbembe tends to use the terms ‘necropower’ and ‘necropolitics’ interchangeably. In this
        article, I repudiate the suggestion that these concepts exceed Foucault’s notions of State
        racism and biopolitics respectively. Nonetheless, I will treat the term ‘necropower’ as though
        it were intended to refer to a distinct modality of power, and will use the term ‘necropolitics’
        to refer to Mbembe’s proposed conceptual framework more broadly.
      2. Foucault uses several terms related to the Greek word technē to capture the way certain prac-
        tices allow one to produce, control, or transform something else, including ‘technologies’,
        ‘techniques’, and ‘arts’ (see Patton, 2014: 503–8). Patton rightly observes that: ‘Insofar as
        there is a rule governing his use of these distinct terms, it is that he uses “art” and “technol-
        ogy” to refer to the overall relation to a particular object in pursuit of a given goal, whereas
        “technique” is reserved for the particular instruments and means employed to produce the
        desired result’ (Patton, 2014: 504). Therefore, biopower can be conceptualized as a ‘technol-
        ogy of power’ in this broader sense, while its specific means of regulating the population
        – various methods of statistical measurement, normalization, and pathologization – should be
        understood as ‘techniques of power’ (Foucault, 1978 [1976]: 139–46; 2003 [1997]: 243–5).
      3. For illuminating comparisons of Foucault and Agamben’s approaches, see Whyte (2013:
        31–2); Koopman (2015: 573–8); and Kelly (2015: 7).   
      4. Of course, Foucault does not actually use the term ‘governmentality’ in Society Must Be Defended.
        However, he does explicitly align this idea with the notion of biopolitics in Security, Territory,
        Population, which is the very next set of lectures he gave at the Collège de France following his
        one-year sabbatical from 1976 to 1977 (Foucault, 2009 [2004]: 108). Indeed, Foucault uses the
        term ‘governmentality’ both to denote the specific political rationality associated with biopoli-
        tics and as a more general model for conceptualizing power as ‘the way in which one conducts
        the conduct of men’ (Foucault, 2009 [2004]: 108; 2008 [2004]: 186). Therefore, while it might
        appear slightly anachronistic to use the concept of governmentality in relation to his analysis of
        biological racism, there is a strong textual and systematic basis for doing so.
      5. The following discussion is focused on Mbembe’s 2003 essay ‘Necropolitics’ (as reproduced
        in his book of the same name) rather than surveying his work more generally. The restricted
        scope of this discussion is justified insofar as the notion of necropolitics does not receive any
        conceptual development in other parts of his work, even if he does make passing reference

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         17     
                                                             
         to it. Having said that, Brennan is right to note that there is an implicit continuity between
         Mbembe’s framework of necropolitics and his later notion of ‘brutalism’ – a concept which
         serves to thematize his recent emphasis on the co-constitution of race and class (Brennan,
         2024: 10–12; Mbembe, 2017 [2013]: 3, 36, 136–7; 2024 [2020]: 78–90).
       6. With this in mind, I argue that Foucault’s notion of State racism should be classified as one
         specific manifestation of thanatopolitics. Indeed, the notion of thanatopolitics can also apply
         to the way in which sovereign power has functioned within queerphobic, ableist, and clas-
         sist forms of biopolitical governmentality. In Society Must Be Defended, Foucault subsumes
         all forms of supposed ‘degeneracy’ or ‘abnormality’ under his idiosyncratic use of the term
         ‘racism’ (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 255). While McWhorter gives insightful reasons as to why
         we should follow Foucault’s usage here, I still maintain it is clearer and more effective sim-
         ply to specify the kinds of biopolitical discrimination that can manifest as thanatopolitics
         (McWhorter, 2009: 32–45).                           
       7. Of course, there are forms of death that are not tied to biopolitics in Foucault’s sense, such
         as when killing is made into a public spectacle for the sake of demonstrating and reinforcing
         sovereign power (Foucault, 1995 [1975]: 47–54). However, in Mbembe’s analysis, racialized
         forms of death are necessarily tied to the differential valuation of life characteristic of biopoli-
         tics. Therefore, and contrary to Deutscher’s suggestion, his sense of the term ‘necropolitics’ is
         very much tied to ‘vital’ ends (Deutscher, 2017: 103).
       8. That said, Mbembe overlooks Foucault’s explicit acknowledgement that colonial practices
         played an important role in shaping the racist biopolitical governmentality deployed in the
         West (Foucault, 2003 [1997]: 103, 257; Mbembe, 2019 [2016]: 76). With this in mind, the
         deficiencies of Foucault’s analysis with respect to colonialism and slavery should be under-
         stood as empirical rather than conceptual. For productive efforts to address these empirical
         shortcomings using Foucault’s own methods and concepts, see Stoler (1995); McWhorter
         (2009); Venn (2009); and Rasmussen (2011).          
       9. However, as Brennan rightly argues, there are good reasons to doubt claims that Mbembe
         should be classified as an Afropessimist thinker himself (Brennan, 2024: 12–15; Wilderson,
         2010: 58).                                          
       References                                            
       Abrahamsen, Rita (2003) African studies and the postcolonial challenge. African Affairs 102(1):
         189–210.                                            
       Agamben, Giorgio (1998 [1995]) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel
         Heller-Roazen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
       Agamben, Giorgio (1999 [1998]) Remnants of Auschwitz: The Witness and the Archive, trans.
         Daniel Heller-Roazen. New York, NY: Zero Books.     
       Brennan, Eugene (2024) Necropolitics and surplus life: Mbembe and beyond. Theory, Culture &
         Society 41(3): 3–19.                                
       Breu, Christopher (2020) Necropolitics enfleshed. Review of Necropolitics by Achille Mbmebe.
         Symplokē 28(1–2): 505–508.                          
       Butler, Judith (1992) Mbembe’s extravagant power. Public Culture 5(1): 67–74.
       Deutscher, Penelope (2017) Foucault’s Futures: A Critique of Reproductive Reason. New York,
         NY: Columbia University Press.                      
       Duarte, André (2023) Pandemic and Crisis of Democracy: Biopolitics, Neoliberalism, and
         Necropolitics in Bolsonaro’s Brazil. New York, NY: Routledge.
       Foucault, Michel (1995 [1975]) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, 2nd edn, trans.
         Alan Sheridan. New York, NY: Vintage Books.         

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      Foucault, Michel (1978 [1976]) The Will to Knowledge: Vol. 1 of The History of Sexuality, trans.
        Robert Hurley. New York, NY: Pantheon.               
      Foucault, Michel (2000 [1988]) The political technology of individuals. In: Faubion, James D.
        (ed.) Power: Vol. 3 of The Essential Works of Michel Foucault, 1954–1984, trans. Robert
        Hurley, et al. New York, NY: The New Press, pp. 403–417.
      Foucault, Michel (2003 [1997]) ‘Society Must Be Defended’: Lectures at the Collège de France,
        1975–1976, ed. Davidson, Arnold I, Bertani, Mauro, Fontana, Alessandro, et al., trans. David
        Macey. New York, NY: Picador.                        
      Foucault, Michel (2008 [2004]) The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France,
        1978–1979, ed. Davidson, Arnold, Senellart, Michel, Ewald, François, et al., trans. Graham
        Burchell. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.          
      Foucault, Michel (2009 [2004]) Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France,
        1977–1978, ed. Davidson, Arnold, Senellart, Michel, Ewald, François, et al., trans. Graham
        Burchell. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.          
      Islekel, Ege Selin (2022) Gender in necropolitics: Race, sexuality, and gendered death. Philosophy
        Compass 17(5): 1–9.                                  
      Karlström, Mikael (2003) On the aesthetics and dialogics of power in the postcolony. Africa:
        Journal of the International African Institute 73(1): 57–76.
      Kelly, Mark G.E. (2015) Biopolitical Imperialism. Winchester: Zero Books.
      Koopman, Colin (2015) Two uses of Michel Foucault in political theory: Concepts and methods in
        Giorgio Agamben and Ian Hacking. Constellations 22(4): 571–585.
      Mamdani, Mahmood (2001) When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism, and the
        Genocide in Rwanda. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Mamdani, Mahmood (2009) Saviours and Survivors: Darfur, Politics, and the War on Terror.
        Cape Town: HSRC Press.                               
      Mamdani, Mahmood (2012) Define and Rule: Native as Political Identity. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.                            
      Mbembe, Achille (2001 [2000]) On the Postcolony. Los Angeles, CA: University of California
        Press.                                               
      Mbembe, Achille (2017 [2013]) Critique of Black Reason, trans. Laurent Dubois. Durham, NC:
        Duke University Press.                               
      Mbembe, Achille (2019 [2016]) Necropolitics, trans. Steven Corcoran. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Mbembe, Achille (2024) Brutalism, trans. Steven Corcoran. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
      McWhorter, Ladelle (2009) Racism and Sexual Oppression in Anglo-America: A Genealogy.
        Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.           
      Patterson, Orlando (1982) Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.                            
      Patton, Paul (2014) Technology (of discipline, governmentality, and ethics). In: Lawlor, Leonard
        and Nale, John (eds) The Cambridge Foucault Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press, pp. 503–508.                                  
      Puar, Jasbir Kaur (2007) Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism in Queer Times. Durham, NC:
        Duke University Press.                               
      Quinan, Christine and Thiele, Kathrin (2020) Biopolitics, necropolitics, cosmopolitics – feminist
        and queer interventions: An introduction. Journal of Gender Studies 29(1): 1–8.
      Rafael, Vicente L. (2022) The Sovereign Trickster: Death and Laughter in the Age of Duterte.
        Durham, NC: Duke University Press.                   
      Rasmussen, Kim Su (2011) Foucault’s genealogy of racism. Theory, Culture & Society 28(5):
        34–51.                                               

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       D’Cruz                                         19     
                                                             
       Rouse, Carolyn Moxley (2021) Necropolitics vs. biopolitics: Spatialization, white privilege, and
         visibility during a pandemic. Cultural Anthropology 36(3): 360–367.
       Sexton, Jared (2010) People-of-color-blindness: Notes on the afterlife of slavery. Social Text
         28(2): 31–56.                                       
       Stoler, Ann Laura (1995) Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault’s History of Sexuality and
         the Colonial Order of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
       Venn, Couze (2009) Neoliberal political economy, biopolitics and colonialism: A transcolonial
         genealogy of inequality. Theory, Culture & Society 26(6): 206–233.
       Weate, Jeremy (2003) Achille Mbembe and the postcolony: Going beyond the text. Research in
         African Literatures 34(4): 27–41.                   
       Whyte, Jessica (2013) Catastrophe and Redemption: The Political Thought of Giorgio Agamben.
         Albany, NY: SUNY Press.                             
       Wilderson, Frank Benjamin, III (2010) Red, White & Black: Cinema and the Structure of U.S.
         Antagonism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.      
       Leonard D’Cruz is a Tutor in Sociology at the University of Melbourne, where he completed his
       PhD in 2023. His research examines the methodological foundations of social and political theory,
       with a particular focus on the thought of Michel Foucault. His work has appeared in Philosophy &
       Social Criticism, The Southern Journal of Philosophy, and Angelaki.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
     Your  gateway  to world-class  research   journals      
                                                             
                                                             
     Sage is a home to over 1,400 Sage Journals off ers:     
     prestigious and highly cited                            
                                • 200+ Gold Open Access and 1,100+
     journals from a wide range                              
                                 hybrid journals in 50+ disciplines
     of disciplines, available                               
                                • A streamlined and accessible
     electronically on the Sage  reading experience across web,
     Journals platform. Search and ePub and PDF formats      
     browse all journals content— • Feature-rich platform including
                                 article- and journal-level metrics,
     including journals in business,                         
                                 email alerts, citation and sharing
     humanities and social sciences,                         
                                 tools, permissions requests 
     and science, technology,    and more                    
     and medicine.              • Discipline Hubs and curated
                                 topic-based article collections
                                 highlighting the latest content
                                 across our portfolios       
                                                             
           Get  started today at journals.sagepub.com        
                                                             
                                                             