[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Post-Neoliberalism?                   
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2021,Vol.38(6)3–28
        Post-Neoliberalism?                                  
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2021
        An  Introduction                                     
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/02632764211036722
        William Davies                                       
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Goldsmiths, Universityof London                      
        Nicholas Gane                                        
        Universityof Warwick                                 
        Abstract                                             
        This article provides an introduction to the special issue on post-neoliberalism. It
        does so by considering challenges to the neoliberal order that have come, post-
        financialcrisis,fromthepoliticalright.Itlookscloselyattherelationofneoliberalism
        to conservatism, on one hand, and libertarianism, on the other, in order to address
        the threat posedto the neoliberal order by paleoconservatism, neoreactionary pol-
        itics,ordonationalism,libertarianpaternalism,anddifferentformsofsovereigntyand
        elite power. The final section of this introduction reflects on the challenge to the
        neoliberal orthodoxy posed by the current COVID-19 crisis. For while events of
        2020–21 have facilitated new forms of privatization of many public services and
        goods, they also signal, potentially, a break from the neoliberal orthodoxies of the
        previous four decades, and, in particular, from their overriding concern for the
        market.                                              
        Keywords                                             
        conservatism, crisis, financial markets, libertarianism, neoliberalism, post-neoliberal-
        ism, sovereignty                                     
                                                             
                                                             
        The period since 2008 has witnessed a combination of two critical and
        scholarlytrendswithrespecttothecategoryofneoliberalism.Firstly,this
        period has been one in which the historical and sociological analysis of
        neoliberalism has expanded, deepened and improved to a remarkable
        extent. The English publication of Foucault’s celebrated lectures on neo-
        liberalism in 2008 (Foucault, 2008) was followed by the publication of
        numerous influential works building on Foucault’s genealogy of neo-
        liberal reason (Dardot and Laval, 2014; Brown, 2015). Simultaneously,
        historians of economics and ideas produced several landmark publica-
        tions on the formation and interaction of different schools of neoliberal
        Correspondingauthor:NicholasGane:Email:n.gane@warwick.ac.uk
        TCSOnlineForum:https://www.theoryculturesociety.org  
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                             Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      thought (Mirowski and Plehwe, 2009; Burgin, 2012; Stedman Jones,
      2012; Mirowski, 2013). More recently, the history of neoliberal thought
      and politics has been enriched to account for the family (Cooper, 2017),
      international markets (Slobodian, 2018), human rights (Whyte, 2019)
      and much besides. Common to virtually all of this work has been a
      dedication to tracing the roots of neoliberalism back well beyond the
      origins of ‘Thatcherism’ or the crisis of Keynesianism, to its intellectual
      kernel in the 1920s and 30s.                           
        Secondly, this has also been a period in which the existential state of
      neoliberalism has been repeatedly questioned. The banking crisis, which
      was acted on in ways that appeared resolutely un-neoliberal, briefly
      appeared to herald the kind of ‘policy paradigm shift’ that had led to
      the rise of monetarist and other neoliberal ideas in the late 1970s (Hall,
      1993). This swiftly turned out to be a chimera, not least because the
      framing of the crisis as an ‘emergency’, ‘war’ or ‘exception’ granted
      permission to policy elites to do whatever it took to defend the financial
      status quo (Davies, 2013; Tooze, 2018). However, in the years that
      followed, the question arose of whether neoliberalism had actually sur-
      vived intact, or whether it had mutated into something else. Led by
      Peck, scholars raised the possibility of ‘post-neoliberalism’ (Peck et al.,
      2010; Springer, 2014), ‘zombie neoliberalism’ (Peck, 2010) or ‘mutant
      neoliberalism’ (Callison and Manfredi, 2020) and continue to ask
      whether this is ‘still neoliberalism’ (Peck and Theodore, 2019). The
      electoral ascendency of ‘populist’ leaders and parties over the 2010s
      was interpreted by many as a rejection of a technocratic, neoliberal
      agenda (e.g. Hopkin and Blyth, 2019). Neoliberalism appeared to
      some to have acquired newly ‘authoritarian’, ‘illiberal’ or ‘anti-
      democratic’ qualities (Bruff, 2014; Rose, 2017; Hendrikse, 2018;
      Brown, 2019).                                          
        For over a decade, therefore, we have benefited from an ever-more
      fine-grained‘historyofthepresent’,whileatthesametimebecomingless
      sure whether this really is still our ‘present’ condition. The relationship
      between ‘neoliberalism’ (as a set of ideas and policies that evolved from
      the 1920s onwards) and our current epoch is at least an open question.
      The category of neoliberalism continues to provide an invaluable tool
      with which to understand political economy and society today, not least
      because the scholarship surrounding it continues to grow in its richness
      and scope. And yet, with every year that passes, the number of appar-
      ently countervailing tendencies within and against neoliberalism is also
      growing. On the basis of a vastly improved understanding of what neo-
      liberalism is, we can at least now agree that it is unlikely to terminate
      with any definitive paradigm-shifting crisis. In that sense, ‘post-
      neoliberalism’ cannot refer to something that comes exclusively after
      neoliberalism, but rather – as with the notion of ‘post-Fordism’ – to a
      set of emergent rationalities, critiques, movements and reforms that take

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                               5      
                                                             
        root in neoliberal societies and begin to weaken or transform key tenets
        of neoliberal reason and politics.                   
         The crisis of Keynesianism, that provided the moment for neoliberal
        policy ideas to be adopted and implemented, obeyed a classically
        Kuhnian rhythm of a paradigm shift. A coherent set of theories and
        predictions, embedded in a set of elite institutions, ceased to explain
        the problems that were afflicting many capitalist societies. Meanwhile,
        a rival set – associated heavily with the Chicago School and publicized
        via think tanks and the media – promised to alleviate crises, inflation in
        particular. Keynesianism, built upon the epistemic and technical affor-
        dances of the wartime state, was met by an alternative with similarly
        programmatic, technocratic and macroeconomic ambitions (Mitchell,
        1998). The regime that emerged – pushed by the right – was one that
        privileged the combating of inflation via monetary policy, the weakening
        of organized labour, tax cuts on high incomes and capital, privatization
        of public assets, greater regulatory tolerance of monopoly, and a steady
        restructuring of the welfare state so as to prioritize work, family and
        ‘personal responsibility’ (Harvey, 2005]). By the 1990s, as this regime
        entered its political golden era, with inflation largely conquered and cap-
        ital increasingly mobile, a more centrist model of neoliberalism became
        hegemonic in Western democracies, in which an active state sought to
        inculcate innovation and flexibility in the social realm, with a view to
        enhancing national ‘competitiveness’ and attracting inward investment.
        Atthesametime,risingprivateindebtednessfuelledgrowthinconsump-
        tion, home ownership and higher education. That this phase of neo-
        liberalism was often overseen by centre-left parties, rather than those
        of the right, signifies that – as a political project – it was as much
        abouteffortstoreformandrenewthe‘social’realminanentrepreneurial
        direction as to reduce constraints on capital (Dardot and Laval, 2014).
         However, this same phase of neoliberalism (which arose after the
        demise of state socialism) also confirmed the Foucauldian insight, that
        neoliberalismisnotonlyapolicyparadigmorinstitutional template,but
        a mode of subjectivity, operating via networks of capillary power inside
        and outside the state, taking particular root in those technocratic para-
        stateinstitutionsofcentralbanks,quangos,outsourcers,andmultilateral
        agencies. It is an ethical and social way of life, and it is unlikely to be
        displaced or replaced simply via a shift in policy consensus.
         Just as Keynesianism was displaced by a ‘paradigm’ that bore certain
        formal resemblances to it, neoliberalism is being corroded and displaced
        by logics and rationalities that share some of its formal qualities: its
        suspicion of the state, its emphasis on decentralization, its re-formatting
        of individual subjectivity. We can witness varieties of what Smith and
        Burrows in their contribution to this special issue term ‘redecentraliza-
        tion’, renewing the attack on the liberal and technocratic state, in the
        name of some more authentic liberty. On this front, post-neoliberal

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                             Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      tendenciesoperateonthemargins,unsettlingthecapacityofgovernment
      to govern, and reasserting the authority of private ownership and modes
      of private governance. But we can also witness varieties of a ‘recentrali-
      zation’,restoringpowerstothenationandthesovereign(howeverunder-
      stood), which had been stolen by technocratic, multilateral and financial
      authorities.                                           
        The special issue on ‘Post-Neoliberalism?’, which this article intro-
      duces, was conceived, assembled and written over the course of 2018–
      20. The majority of the papers reflect on the ascendency of right-wing
      political movements and ideas in Europe and the United States, which
      have mounted an increasingly vigorous critique of the neoliberal status
      quoin recent years,gaininganumber ofelectoral breakthroughsaround
      the world. But the timing meant that none of the papers was able to
      confront fully or evaluate the most recent crisis of neoliberalism, namely
      theCOVID-19pandemicthatengulfedtheglobeover2020.Inthisintro-
      duction, we seek to contextualize the papers in two ways, with a view to
      makingsenseofcontemporary‘post-neoliberalism’. Firstly,wereflect on
      some of the tensions lurking within the history of neoliberal thought, in
      relationto paralleltraditionsof conservativeandlibertarian thought.To
      the extent that one powerful challenge to neoliberal technocracy and
      globalization today is coming from the right, it is important to clarify
      thelongstandingdistinctionsanddifferencesthatshapeandanimatethat
      opposition. Secondly, and more speculatively, we consider some of the
      ‘post-neoliberal’ features of the politics surrounding COVID-19. The
      events of 2020–21 have facilitated new forms of privatization of many
      public services and goods, yet it is hard to deny that (especially in terms
      of macroeconomic policy) they also herald a break from the neoliberal
      orthodoxies of the previous four decades. We consider how these events
      may intersect with the phenomena and ideas explored by the papers in
      thisissueandconcludebynotingthedecliningautonomyof‘themarket’
      and of ‘competition’ as organizing principles of social and global
      organization.                                          
      Neoliberalism: Between Conservatism and Libertarianism?
      It is worth, then, addressing the hybrid nature of neoliberalism more
      closely in order to question the value of adding the prefix ‘post-’ to a
      liberalism that is already ‘neo’ – a question that is raised rather than
      decided by the title of this special issue. One way to do this, as both
      ‘post-’and‘neo-’signifyarelationoftime,intheformofareactionto,or
      mutation of, that which existed previously, is to think historically.
      Wendy Brown (2015), in her book Undoing the Demos, rightly argues
      that neoliberalism originated as much in opposition to fascism as to
      socialism–apointthatFoucault(2008)addressesindetailinhisanalysis
      of ordoliberalism in his now-famous lectures on biopolitics. But this
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                               7      
                                                             
        opposition to fascism did not lead to a uniform view of the role of the
        state,libertyorsovereignty,andfromitsinceptioninthe1920sand1930s
        onwards, neoliberalism has a complex and at times uneasy relationship
        with other movements on the political right, in particular conservatism
        and libertarianism. At the Walter Lippmann Colloquium in 1938 – the
        starting point of European neoliberalism for Foucault – differences were
        aired that became more significant over time. The majority of those pre-
        sent sided with Hayek in calling for the reinvention of liberalism in ways
        that broke with classical forms of laissez-faire liberalism associated with
        figures such as Adam Smith. They did so by moving away from a nat-
        uralistic conception of markets as things that worked best through min-
        imal government interference and instead asked what government and
        the state could do in service of markets and their freedoms. But not
        everyone agreed. Notably, Ludwig von Mises, whose work became the
        key point of departure for the libertarian thinker Murray Rothbard (see
        thearticlebyMelindaCooperinthisissue),wasoneofafewtocontinue
        toextolthevirtuesofclassicalliberalism,arguingthatitwasnot‘thefree
        play of economic forces’ but rather ‘the anti-liberal policies of govern-
        ments’thatwastheproblem(MisesinReinhoudtandAudier,2018:121).
        Other participants in the colloquium were less vocal at this event but,
        over the coming years, revealed differences with Hayek and drifted away
        from the Mont Pe`lerin Society, in particular Raymond Aron and
        Michael Polanyi, who worked instead with the Congress for Cultural
        Freedom through the 1950s (see Gane, 2016). Of the two, Aron was
        more outspoken in his critique of Hayek, not only rejecting his raw
        economicindividualisminfavourofamoretraditionalbrandofpolitical
        conservatism but also attacking his conception of freedom in a devastat-
        ing review of Hayek’s magnum opus, The Constitution of Liberty
        (Aron, 1994).                                        
         Even among those who are commonly positioned together as central
        figures in the history of the neoliberal project there are important meth-
        odological and political differences. Wendy Brown, for example, argues
        thatHayek‘wasraisedonOrdoliberalism’(2015:59),butthiswasnot,in
        fact, the case as Hayek’s economic and political views were shaped by
        key Austrian figures such as Menger and von Mises, and many of the
        positions of key ordoliberal thinkers, in particular Wilhelm Ro¨pke, were
        incompatiblewiththenewbrandofeconomicindividualismchampioned
        by Hayek from the 1940s onwards. Brown’s reading is consistent with
        that of Foucault, who describes ordoliberalism in terms of a call for the
        ‘general regulation of society by the market’ (Foucault, 2008: 145) – a
        process from which nothing is seen to be sacred (Foucault, 2008: 133).
        This understanding, however, is mistaken, as figures such as Ro¨ pke were
        deeply conservative and by no means believed either that principles of
        competition should be injected into all spheres of social life or that all
        societal institutions should or could be opened up to the free play of

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                             Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      marketforces.InAHumaneEconomy,Ro¨pkeisquiteclearonthispoint:
      ‘The truth is that competition, which we need as a regulator in a free
      economy,comesuponallsidesagainstlimitswhichwewouldnotwishit
      totransgress’(1960:128).Inthistext,Ro¨pkedefendsinstitutionssuchas
      the family and the church and argues that ‘genuine communities’ and
      ‘tradition’ should be protected from intrusion by the market. Elsewhere,
      Ro¨ pkeassertedthevalueofEuropeanculture,andevenspokeindefence
      ofapartheidonthegroundsthat‘theSouthAfricanBantu’was‘notonly
      a man of an utterly different race, but, at the same time, stems from a
      completely different type and level of civilization’ (Ro¨ pke, 1965: 10).
      Such views set Ro¨pke apart from most other members of the Mont
      Pe`lerin Society (see Slobodian, 2018:146–81 for a detailed assessment
      of his position), and reveal conservative and racist commitments that
      are far removed from a simplistic belief in the unbridled powers of com-
      petition, as depicted by Foucault in his biopolitics lectures.
        Neoliberalism, then, emerged in tension, on one hand, with laissez-
      faire liberalism or what subsequently became known as libertarianism (a
      term that Hayek rejected; see Hayek, 1960: 352), and, on the other, to
      forms of conservativism that asserted the value of religion (in particular
      Christianity), nation, and race. In terms of the former of these move-
      ments,intheRoadtoSerfdomHayektakesanexplicitstandagainstwhat
      he calls ‘a dogmatic laissez-faire attitude’ on the grounds that the ‘forces
      of competition’ should be used as a means for ‘co-ordinating human
      effort’ rather than ‘leaving things just as they are’ (1944: 37). This, in
      turn, became central to the work of the Mont Pe`lerin Society, which,
      from its inception, addressed the idea that ‘competition can be made
      more effective and more beneficent by certain activities of government
      than it wouldbewithout them’ (Hayek, 1948: 110). Interms of the latter
      movement, Hayek takes an explicit stand against conservatism in the
      postscript to The Constitution of Liberty (1960: 343–55), arguing that it
      stands against ‘drastic change’ and, because of this, tends to be dragged
      along paths not of its own choosing. Hayek says, by contrast, that his
      own brand of liberalism, unlike conservatism, has the ‘courage and con-
      fidence’ to oppose socialism and also provide a genuine alternative (see
      Hayek, 1960: 345). Because of this, Hayek argues that it is wrong to
      understand socialism, liberalism and conservatism as different positions
      alongasinglelinethatrunsfromsocialismonthelefttoconservatismon
      the right, and liberalism somewhere in between. Instead, he plots these
      political positions as different corners of a triangle, with conservatism in
      onecorner,tryingtopullbackfromliberalismandsocialismintheother
      two (Hayek, 1960: 344).                                
        The importance of this metaphor of the triangle is that, for Hayek,
      conservatism and liberalism do not exist along a line of continuity but
      instead converge on and depart from socialist ideas from quite different
      angles.ThroughthecourseofTheConstitutionofLiberty,Hayekisquite

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                               9      
                                                             
        clear about the differences between conservatism and neoliberalism.
        The former, he says, has a fondness for authority; it misunderstands
        the nature and workings of economic forces; it fears new ideas; and it
        is prone to a ‘strident nationalism’ as it often seeks to defend ‘our indus-
        try’(something,heargues,thatitshareswithsocialism;seeHayek,1960:
        348–50). Neoliberalism, Hayek argues, provides a corrective to each of
        these mistakes: traditional forms of authority (be these of church, state,
        or family) and all ‘obstacles to free growth’ should be swept aside by the
        ‘spontaneous forces’ of the free market; economic forces should no
        longer be understood through formal models of equilibrium but through
        the dynamics of the pricemechanism; and there shouldbea new form of
        internationalism based not on workers’ rights or solidarity but the fric-
        tionless movement of capital and labour across national borders.
         Hayek’s position, however, became more complex over time as it
        drifted between libertarianism and conservatism, particularly from the
        1960sonwards.InearlytextssuchasTheRoadtoSerfdom(1944)andhis
        inaugural address to the Mont Pe`lerin Society (1948: 107–18), Hayek
        stood against libertarian calls for small government and the minimal
        state and argued instead that both can be harnessed to serve market
        forces and freedoms. But in his later work, he was less concerned with
        occupying and reprogramming the state. Nowhere is this clearer than in
        his work on the denationalization of money (Hayek, 1976; for useful
        commentaries see Cooper and Konings, 2015; Ingham, 2020), in which
        he argues that central banks should be disbanded and replaced by com-
        mercialbanksthatarefreetoissuecurrenciesfromwhichconsumerscan
        choose. Hayek attacks the ability for any nation-state to exercise mon-
        etary control over its territory and proposes instead that money should
        be fully marketized rather than used by national governments to serve
        their own political interests. The boundaries between neoliberalism and
        libertarianismherebecomehardertodefineasHayekmovesawayfroma
        project that seeks to redefine the rationale for government and the state
        alongmarket-basedlines,andinsteadseekstobreakthemonopolyofthe
        state over the money supply in a bid to enhance individual consumer
        freedoms.                                            
         Itmight bepresumed, in thelightof thepostscript toTheConstitution
        of Liberty and the above arguments of The Denationalization of Money,
        that, over time, Hayek’s neoliberalism became more libertarian in basis
        rather than conservative, but this is not, in fact, the case. In The Morals
        oftheMarket,JessicaWhyterightlyarguesthat‘Ratherthananexternal
        supplement, orapragmaticpartner, socialconservatism,includingexpli-
        cit appeals to family values, Christianity and ‘‘Western civilisation’’, was
        foundational to the consolidation of organised neoliberalism in the mid
        twentieth century’ (2019: 9), and that Hayek was central to this project.
        In his inaugural address to the Mont Pe`lerin Society, Hayek speaks of
        ‘moral aims’ and ‘moral fervour’ (1948: 109), and this concern with the

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      question of morality became a theme of his later work, from his 1961
      lecture on ‘The Moral Element in Free Enterprise’ (see 1967: 229–36)
      through to Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973). The arguments of this
      lecture are surprising: that if freedom is to ‘work well’ it ‘requires not
      only moral standards but moral standards of a particular kind’, and, for
      this reason, ‘we should do all in our power to spread the appropriate
      moral convictions’ (1967: 230–1). Whyte explains that the importance of
      morals, for Hayek, lies in their appeal to individual responsibility rather
      than to government-led forms of ‘coercive enforcement’ (Whyte, 2019:
      11).Whileitmightseemsuchapositionwouldbeamenabletoright-wing
      libertarians, this is far from the case, as Murray Rothbard, in particular,
      arguedthatHayekwastooconservativeinhisdefenceoftradition(2009:
      67) and in believing that ‘reason and rationalism are synonymous with
      government coercion...rather than realizing that reason is in fact the
      very opposite of coercion’ (2009: 64). This, along with the continued role
      Hayekgivesto‘noncoercive’activitiesofthestate,leadsRothbardtocall
      The Constitution of Liberty, in which Hayek actively sought to distance
      himself from conservatism, an ‘evil’ and ‘dangerous’ book (2009: 61).
        The purpose of this brief excursion into the history of neoliberalism
      (which,clearly,isfarfromcomplete,andcould,forexample,beextended
      into the 1980s and ’90s to consider the infusion of neoliberal ideas and
      principles into leftist thought, most notably in the form of Third Way
      politics) is not to ascertain whether Hayek’s political commitments were
      morelibertarianorneoliberalinbasis,buttoshowthatneoliberalismhas
      never existed in a fixed relation to its political others but emerged in
      tension to conservatism and libertarianism while, at times, sharing the
      groundofboth.Thisisimportantasitsuggeststhatcurrentconservative
      and libertarian reactions against neoliberalism do not simply signal the
      death of the latter, far from it, but rather the emergence of new, shifting
      andhybridpoliticalpositionsandinterestsonthepoliticalright.Forthis
      reason,throughthecourseofthecurrentspecialissue,post-neoliberalism
      is not used as a descriptor of a world beyond neoliberalism but rather as
      adeviceforquestioningthemutationofpreviousformsofliberalismand
      neoliberalism and the challenges they pose in the present.
        While the history of neoliberalism is not simply about Hayek, as
      Foucault’s lectures have clearly shown, his triangulation of socialism,
      conservatism and (neo-)liberalism continues to be useful as it can be
      reconfigured to construct a different continuum of thought on the polit-
      ical right: from libertarianism at one end to conservatism at the other,
      with neoliberalism oscillating between the two. This understanding of
      neoliberalism can be used to analyse different trajectories of neoliberal
      reason, including those associated with the Chicago School. As Gane
      shows in this special issue, Milton Friedman, for example, bridges both
      conservatism and libertarianism in a different way as not only does he
      prescribealimitedroleforgovernmentbutallocatesaprivilegedposition

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              11      
                                                             
        to the family, not the market, as the core institution of modern capitalist
        society. As Melinda Cooper argues in Family Values (2017), Friedman
        was strategic in taking such positions, for his defence of the family was
        tied to an attack on state paternalism and a call instead for privatized
        forms of welfare. This led to a coalition of interests between Friedman,
        who spoke in favour of the family as an institution that could take on
        many of the responsibilities of the welfare state, and more conservative
        figures who believed in family values on more traditional grounds.
         The ability of neoliberal thinkers to work with or at least alongside
        theirconservativeandlibertariancolleagues,oftenforparticularpolitical
        purposes, explains, at least in part, both the continued success of the
        neoliberal project and why neoliberalism has proved so difficult to
        define. This is not to say, however, that there are no tensions between
        these camps; quite the opposite, as the above example of Rothbard’s
        hostility to Hayek’s work clearly shows. This special issue asks, then,
        how the neoliberal project has continued to operate and even grow in
        strengthinspiteofsuchtensions,andwhethertheuneasyalliancesonthe
        political right between neoliberalism, conservatism and libertarianism
        potentially provide as much of a threat to the stability of the neoliberal
        project as any form of opposition from a leftist alternative. With these
        questionsinmind,akeyconcernofthisissueistoconsiderthecontinued
        operationandstabilityofneoliberalisminrelationtoarangeofpositions
        and movements on the political right, including: paleoconservatism
        (Cooper), neoreactionary politics (Smith and Burrows), ordonationalism
        (Geva), libertarian paternalism (Gane), and new constitutionalism
        (Slobodian).                                         
         In the opening paper of this issue, Melinda Cooper provides a geneal-
        ogy of the Alt-right that traces its origins back to von Mises and then
        forward through the workof hisacolyte, Rothbard. Rothbard’s position
        ismoreextremethanthatofvonMisesasitadvocateswhatCoopercalls
        the ‘total insurrection of the state’ and is based upon a ‘dichotomous
        theoryofpowerthatsawthestateastheinstigatorofallviolenceandthe
        marketasaspaceofperfectlyconsensualexchangerelations,whereforce
        was only ever deployed legitimately, in defence of person and property’.
        Rothbard’s economic method is nothing particularly new as it largely
        followed von Mises in advancing a subjective theory of value based on
        praxeology (for an overview see Rothbard, 1995), but his political pos-
        ition is noteworthy as it sought to synthesize a libertarian and paleocon-
        servative position. Cooper explains that paleoconservatism is important
        becauseitisquitedifferenttoneoconservatism:itisnotpro-NewDealor
        born out of urban America. Instead, it stands for small government and
        against internationalism, and is rooted in the history and politics of the
        southern states of the US. Cooper argues that while this blend of liber-
        tarianism and conservatism sat on the side-lines for many years, includ-
        ing through the era of Reaganite conservatism, it can no longer be

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      ignored, not leastbecause of its influence onthe Alt-right, which became
      increasingly prominent through the Trump presidency.   
        QuinnSlobodianadvancesacomparablepositiontothatofCooperas
      he argues that many of the fiercest criticisms of neoliberalism have come
      not from the ‘grassroots social movements of the left’ but rather from
      ‘other movements on the political right’. Slodobian questions the
      common assumption that there exists a ‘coherence of interests’ between
      elites in the projects of free trade and globalization, and argues, instead,
      that the New Constitutionalism of the 1990s onwards, which sought to
      lock-in ‘private capital rights through multilateral legal entities insulated
      from democracy’, did not benefit all elites in a similar way. Rather, there
      were elites who lost through this process, most notably those involved in
      heavy industries such as steel, which, while only a minor force in the US
      economy, is ‘symbolically important to issues of deindustrialization,
      unemployment, and masculinity’, especially in the Midwestern states
      that were key to Trump’s election victory in 2016. Slobodian’s focus,
      then, is on the disgruntled elites who sought a backlash to New
      Constitutionalism not from below but from above, and whose interests
      ‘helped frame a critique of actually existing neoliberal globalism, which
      Trump both adopted and acted on as part of his trade war’. In order to
      understand this development, Slobodian argues, it is important that cri-
      tiques of neoliberalism treat it not as ‘an overly coherent package’ but
      paycloseattentioninsteadtothe‘powerofparticularsectorsofcapitalin
      bending legal structures to their benefit’. To do this, it is necessary for
      analysesof neoliberalism tomove beyondstudy of thefinancialsector to
      look also at trade and manufacturing, which operate on different
      grounds, not least because they require ‘more regularity and longer
      time horizons’.                                        
        Dorit Geva addresses the refashioning of neoliberalism from the pol-
      iticalrightinadifferentnationalcontext:ViktorOrba´n’sreconfiguration
      of state and government in Hungary. Geva argues that Orba´n has estab-
      lished a regime that moves beyond existing forms of neoliberalism as it
      merges ‘authoritarianism, racist and patriarchal nationalism, clientelism,
      and partial neoliberalization’. She argues that, in so doing, Orba´n has
      taken neoliberalism to its extreme as he has produced a new form of
      Bonapartismfortheneoliberalage,one‘whosestrategyforaccumulation
      of power is to take control of the state as primary arbiter over accumu-
      lation of capital’. Geva calls this new type of political regime, which
      operates through ‘brute racism, misogyny, and homophobia, along
      with a take-over of universities, culture sectors, and the media’, a form
      of ‘ordonationalism’. She argues that there are three main elements to
      this new formof nationalism in Hungary: first,there-composition of the
      neoliberal state as ‘a selectively powerful and authoritarian’ institution;
      second, the emptying of parliamentary democracy of any genuine con-
      tent; and third, the dedication of state resources to enable ‘consumption

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              13      
                                                             
        as a source of social reproduction’. Geva argues, however, that the irony
        of this new form of hyper-nationalist neoliberalism is that it has only
        been possible because Orba´n has made Hungary ‘the subservient partner
        to several global powers’, in particular the EU, Russia, and China.
         Theabovethreepapers,albeitimplicitly,questiontherelationbetween
        economic and political forms of sovereignty within different historical
        and national configurations of neoliberalism. This question of sover-
        eignty is the focus of William Davies’ article in this special issue, in
        whichhearguesthatsincetheglobalfinancialcrisisof2008neoliberalism
        can no longer be understood in terms of the economization or market-
        ization of everything but, following key developments such as Brexit, by
        the ejection of ‘economy’ from ‘political practice’. This ‘release’ of pol-
        iticsfromeconomicsinthepost-crisisperiod,Daviesargues,isdefinedby
        resurgent forms of nationalism and protectionism that refocus attention
        on territory and borders as the objects and limits of sovereign power.
        Rather than seeing this as a break from neoliberalism, however, Davies
        argues that this transition is ‘one that has occurred within the logic and
        historical practices of neoliberalism’ and has therefore produced ‘popu-
        list mutations of neoliberalism’ rather than a challenge to it. Davies
        understands this development in terms of the ‘revenge of sovereignty’
        upon forms of liberal governmentality – something that has worked by
        rendering ‘the border (and threats to migrants) a crucial part of the
        physicsandmetaphysicsofthestate’,andbystriking‘alliancesandcom-
        binations with non-state centres of sovereign power’, in particular those
        in the financial sector and platform capitalism.     
         Nicholas Gane addresses a different but related development in the
        post-crisis period: the rise of behavioural or ‘nudge’ economics. Gane
        arguesthatthistypeofeconomicsflourishedthroughthisperiodbecause
        at a time when financial markets entered a state of panic, figures such as
        Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler proposed that markets are populated
        notbyfullyrationalactorsintheformofhomoeconomicusbutbyhuman
        beings prone to making mistakes. Because of this, they argue, raw liber-
        tarianism is not the answer because individuals cannot be left to their
        own devices as they cannot be relied upon to make life-choices from
        which they will benefit. Instead, what is needed is a new form of soft
        governance in the form of libertarian paternalism. Gane’s article ques-
        tions the political valuesthat underpin this form of governance and pays
        particular attention to the gendered basis of this new type of authority,
        the market-based norms that underpin libertarian paternalism, and its
        empowerment of ‘experts’ and advisory teams to influence decision-
        making both within and beyond the formal arena of party politics.
        Gane’s view is that libertarian paternalism is not a post-neoliberal devel-
        opment but rather a hybrid form of neoliberalism that departs, in
        important respects, from Austrian, German and North American trajec-
        tories of neoliberal reason while, at the same time, developing and

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      extending these in new ways by addressing ‘internalities’ of consumer
      behaviourthatcannotbedisciplinedandcorrectedbyrawmarketforces.
        Smith and Burrows consider a more radical trajectory of right-wing
      libertarianism through the post-crisis period in the USA: the Alt-right.
      They do soby focusingon the influence of four key figures – Nick Land,
      CurtisYarvin,PeterThiel,andPatriFriedman–whoareunitednotbya
      neoliberal imperative to marketize the state but rather by a drive to exit
      from all forms of state intervention and control. Smith and Burrows pay
      close attention to the right accelerationism of neoreactionary thought
      (NRx) which, inspired by Nick Land’s vision of Dark Enlightenment,
      advances a stark alternative to state-centred forms of neoliberalism: to
      retire all government employees and run society as a business. This pro-
      posal, which calls for democratic institutions to be replaced by rule by a
      CEO or monarch, is articulated most forcefully by Curtis Yarvin, who
      views Prussian cameralism, in which a state is a business that owns a
      country, as the most viable model for a future politics. Yarvin’s contri-
      bution to this project is Urbit: a digital platform based on a centreless
      network of networks that seeks to ‘‘‘redecentralize’’ the web for the 21st
      century’. Technologies such as Urbit, Smith and Burrows argue, lead us
      towards a post-neoliberal world, one based on decentralized platforms
      and ‘patchwork’ forms of sovereignty and governance rather than any
      commitment to democracy, which is described by Land not just as
      ‘doomed’ but ‘doom itself’.                            
        AlanFinlaysonaddressesadifferentaspectofwhatmightbecalledthe
      Dark Enlightenment: the rise of ‘ideological entrepreneurs’ opposed to
      progressivism and social reform. Finlayson argues that these entrepre-
      neurshavebeenempoweredbynewformsofdigitalcommunication,and
      that while contradictory and conflicting positions have emerged across
      the Alt-right (from conservatism through to ethnonationalism and liber-
      tarianism), these are united in opposition to liberal ideas of the state. In
      particular, what unifies the Alt-right is a belief in the value of inequality.
      Finlaysonexplains:‘inequality isacoreconcept,understoodasanatural
      phenomenon, scientifically verified and the necessary basis of civil order,
      essential to the maintenance of individual freedom, economic stability
      and cultural coherence’. Such views are consistent with those of Hayek,
      who was openly critical of the attempts by welfarist states to equalize
      naturaldifferencesbetweenindividuals,butFinalysonobservesthatcon-
      temporary forms of right-wing populism go further than this as they
      advance ‘a broad-based challenge to the technocratic politics of third-
      way neoliberalism and globalization’ and share a common enemy: ‘the
      establishment’,‘theswamp’,‘theblob’,‘thecathedral’.Finlaysonargues,
      however, that while such reactionary politics might be seen as opposing
      neoliberalism, they cannot simply be termed ‘post-neoliberal’ as, among
      other things, they demand ‘yet greater marketization of ideas and ideol-
      ogies, culture and consciousness’.                     

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              15      
                                                             
        The Crisis of 2020                                   
                                                             
        The right-wing intellectual and political forces, which several of the col-
        lected papers explore, attained public visibility over the years of the
        Trump presidency, culminating in the astonishing storming of the
        Capitol Building on 6 January 2021. Trump’s core support had been
        dressed up in various ways over the previous five years – as ‘populist’,
        ‘nativist’, ‘left behind’. But we should not duck the fact that it was
        also driven by white nationalist and neo-fascist impulses and ideas.
        A post-neoliberalism driven by appeals to ‘nation’, and attacks on the
        governmental liberal state, may derive from a range of libertarian and
        conservative traditions, but it also offers dangerous space for the Far
        Right. That these forces suffered electoral defeat in the United States,
        at least, was heavily thanks to another challenge to neoliberalism alto-
        gether, emanating from the non-human world.          
         Neoliberalism’s ‘death’ has been prematurely announced on multiple
        occasions, most widely in response to the global financial crisis of 2008
        and then in response to the electoral upheavals that shook Britain and
        the United States in 2016. The appearance of COVID-19 at the end of
        2019, which had been declared a pandemic by the following spring,
        provoked a fresh round of arguments regarding its implications for neo-
        liberalism (e.g. Saad-Filho, 2020). Many analyses focused on how the
        virus had exposed the limits of the neoliberal state (e.g. Jones and
        Hameiri, 2021). And yet, perhaps mindful of how previous obituaries
        have been overturned by events, few have been willing to declare the
        end of neoliberalism on this occasion. Long-standing authorities on
        the topic predicted that neoliberal forces would exploit the chaos of
        the pandemic as they had done in previous emergencies, and emerge
        even stronger as a result (Mirowski, 2020; Klein, 2020). The renewed
        reliance of many governments on exceptional monetary policies, of the
        sort deployed in the aftermath of 2008, indicated that policy-makers
        (especially those in central banks) were drawing on their experiences
        over the global financial crisis (Tooze, 2020), potentially translating
        into a further bail-out for asset-holders and corporations (Brenner,
        2020). In any case, the events of 2020 were not triggered directly by
        failures of the price system, in the way that those of 2008 had been.
         TotaketheUK,forexample,itsexperienceofthepandemicexhibited
        many of the hallmarks of neoliberal government of recent decades,
        together with the dire social consequences of neoliberal reforms to the
        welfarestateandhealthservice.AstheBritishgovernmententeredemer-
        gency response mode, the public was shocked to discover how profitable
        the provision of public goods and services had become for well-
        positioned firms and consultants, able to hoover up contracts at short
        notice. The steady ‘hollowing out’ of the state, and the replacement of
        public administrators by private contractors, is a central feature of

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Britishneoliberalismthathasbeenstudiedextensivelysincethe1990sbut
      came dramatically to the fore during 2020 (Rhodes, 1996; Bowman et al,
      2015; Christophers, 2020). The health crisis was a huge opportunity for
      firms such as Serco and Palantir, who offered to deliver central state
      functions of security and surveillance, and who are likely to expand
      their reach into the public sector (and its data) as a result. Meanwhile,
      analyses of Britain’s high mortality rate emphasized the impact of
      inequality and cuts to social spending, especially those that began in
      2010, which had been influencing mortality rates and life expectancy
      well before the arrival of COVID-19 (Marmot et al., 2020).
        On the other hand, even seasoned watchers of neoliberal crises may
      have been taken aback by certain macroeconomic aspects of the policy
      response, which flew in the face of orthodoxies of the previous 40 years.
      The dramatic rise of government borrowing, which covered the cost of
      pandemic responses and unprecedented falls in GDP, had no effect on
      thecostofborrowing(realinterestongovernmentdebtremainedcloseto
      zeroover2020–21),overturningthejustificationforausteritymeasuresin
      BritainandtheEurozone.Equallyextraordinarywasthefactthat,inthe
      contextoftheUK,thevastmajorityofthedebtwasbeingboughtbythe
      Bank of England, raising suspicions (denied by the Bank) that Britain
      was now engaged in an experiment in ‘monetary financing’ of the state.
        In the United States, Jerome Powell, Chairman of the Federal
      Reserve, announced in summer 2020 that the Fed would be prepared
      to accept higher inflation in the medium-term, in order to get the econ-
      omy growing again, an explicit contradiction of the monetarist and
      ‘supply-side’ orthodoxy at the heart of Reaganism and Thatcherism.
      The appointment of Lina Khan, a well-known critic of ‘Big Tech’, as
      Chair of the Federal Trade Commission in June 2021 represented the
      most significant departure from the Chicago School paradigm of anti-
      trust since it became embedded in the US in the 1970s. Janet Yellen, the
      US Treasury Secretary, spoke of the need for a minimum global corpor-
      ation tax to prevent a competitive ‘race for the bottom’ on taxation.
      Meanwhile, the size of the Biden administration’s fiscal stimulus – $1.9
      trillion – was sufficiently large to suggest a significant political realign-
      ment to the left, and led to warnings of inflation from mainstream neo-
      liberal voices such as Larry Summers and The Economist. At least in the
      useofmacroeconomicpolicylevers,thepandemicledtoamoredramatic
      overturning of neoliberal orthodoxies than any other financial or polit-
      ical crises of the previous two decades, and which has already left a
      residue in the rationale of ‘Bidenomics’, suggesting that this crisis may
      be understood as ‘1979 in reverse’ (Durand, 2021). These are signs that
      perhapsthereisfinallyatypeofKuhnianshiftinthe‘policyparadigm’of
      neoliberalism. The fiscal opportunities provided by ultra-low borrowing
      costs, that had been highlighted by many critics of neoliberalism (e.g.
      Lonergan and Blyth, 2020), have finally been seized by default.

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              17      
                                                             
         The precedent of the global financial crisis would suggest that, once
        this period of emergency has passed, then a more familiar, routinized
        form of neoliberal government will be re-established, albeit with even
        greater public debts than were accrued in 2008–9. There are, however,
        a number of critical areas where the events of 2020–21 will alter the
        conditions of political and economic activity, in ways that may well syn-
        thesizesomethingentirelynewandnolongerrecognizableas‘neoliberal’.
        At the same time, this would likely lead to a renewal of liberal and
        libertarian critiques of the status quo, of a sort that have already
        gained some momentum in the context of lock-downs and behavioural
        surveillance. The coming years will cast a fresh light on prospects for
        ‘post-neoliberalism’,andpotentiallyheightentheinfluenceofsomeofthe
        counter-movements and rival political projects explored in this issue.
         The first trend that looks likely to endure, as a set of ‘problems’ if not
        necessarily as political strategy, is the renewed ascendency of key instru-
        ments of statistical governmentality, of the sort explored by Foucault in
        Security, Territory, Population. The central problem of the pandemic,
        which will not suddenly disappear (not least due to long-term risk man-
        agementofpossiblefuturepandemics),concernstheobjectthatFoucault
        views as emerging over the 18th century, thanks to the development of
        statistics and demographic expertise: population (Foucault, 2007: 71).
        COVID-19 has thrust new emphasis upon biopolitical techniques for
        the modelling and influencing of behaviour, with an emphasis on the
        immanent ‘laws’ofpopulation,epidemiology especially.Getting individ-
        uals to conform to rapidly established norms so as to limit transmission
        rates, with a view to preventing health systems from being ‘over-
        whelmed’, is a consummate example of liberal governmentality.
         This has further elevated the status of behavioural psychologists and
        ‘nudge’ techniques in larger networks of governmentality, both in and
        beyond the state. Gane’s contribution to this issue details the ambiguous
        status of such techniques in the longer history of liberalism and neo-
        liberalism, which he sees as geared towards the construction of individ-
        uals corrected for rather than by the market. The core idea of the nudge
        agenda is ‘libertarian paternalism’, which stands for soft behavioural
        interventions rather than hard state authority wherever possible. The
        importance of this new form of libertarianism became clear in the early
        stagesoftheCOVIDcrisisastheBritishgovernmentbrieflyhopedthatit
        could avoid a lock-down in the Spring of 2020, purely by relying on
        behavioural expertise to govern individual choices (Calvert and
        Arbuthnott, 2021).                                   
         If, as Davies explores in his contribution to this issue, neoliberalism
        has pursued a slow dismantling of the collectivist edifices of liberal gov-
        ernment (most significantly, a welfare state organized around a principle
        ofsocialinsurance),thepandemichasoccasionedarenewedrequirement
        for governmental instruments that can act upon ‘society’ according to

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      statistical logics of risk and normality. The prominence of statistical
      charts and models in the public life of liberal democracies over 2020–
      21 was evidence of a renewed dependence of the state upon forms of
      centralized quantitative expertise and demographic rationality, of the
      sort that neoliberal intellectuals had always feared and believed would
      lead to the destruction of liberty (Slobodian, 2018; Whyte, 2019).
      Whether COVID-19 leads to a political reappraisal of the 20th-century
      welfare state (a revival of pre-neoliberalism) remains to be seen, but in a
      strictly technical sense, the government of sickness, the labour market,
      housing and the family has become apolitical objective all over again, in
      ways that cannot be left to emergent forces of competition and enter-
      prise. Forms of local solidarity, collective responsibility and collective
      risk reappeared over the course of the pandemic and may not be easily
      forgotten.Anotherlessonoftheglobalfinancialcrisisisthat,whileemer-
      gency policy responses do not themselves endure, the shared memory of
      them does, which can have unpredictable political consequences several
      years later.                                           
        A second consequence of the pandemic, which will shape how and
      whether neoliberalism endures, is the rapid reassertion of national bor-
      dersasinstrumentsofnationalhealthsecurityandsurveillance.Infection
      rates during the first wave of COVID-19 corresponded closely to the
      amount of international air travel in and out of a country and a city
      (Panaetal.,2021).NationssuchasNewZealandwerewidelypraisedfor
      closing their borders very early in the pandemic. New infrastructures of
      border security and control have been hastily assembled, such as the use
      of hotels as quarantining facilities and mobile tracking devices of new
      arrivals. A crucial condition of globalization, namely international jet
      travel, has become a new source of risk to be restricted and governed
      in new ways, generating new inequalities in mobility and exacerbating
      existing ones. The renewed reliance on national infrastructures of gov-
      ernmentality – health services, vaccination programs, surveillance sys-
      tems, demographic statistics – has turned the global into a space of
      incalculable uncertainty and threats.                  
        To be sure, this does not necessarily upset the direction of the neo-
      liberalism of the previous decade. While liberating and ‘encasing’ the
      economic space of the ‘global’ may have been a long-standing ambition
      of neoliberals (Slobodian, 2018), numerous scholars have pointed to the
      rising nationalism, ethnocentricity and authoritarianism of neoliberal-
      ism in the wake of the global financial crisis (Callison and Manfredi,
      2019). The early neoliberals were themselves somewhat divided over
      whether people should be granted freedoms to move internationally,
      or whether such liberty should be reserved for goods and capital, and
      were generally concerned to defend the ethnic and cultural distinction
      of ‘the West’ vis-a`-vis trading partners in Asia or the Global South
      (Slobodian, 2018).                                     

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              19      
                                                             
         The contributions of Cooper, Slobodian and Geva each casts some
        light on the resurfacing of national and ethnic hierarchy, in response to
        theperceivedculturalrelativism,globalismandelitismofexistingcentres
        of technocratic power. Whether in the case of Orba´n’s Hungary (Geva),
        Trump’s America (Slobodian) or the paleo-conservatism of Rothbard
        (Cooper), we can witness overlapping critiques of cosmopolitanism and
        international finance. These critiques are made in the name of purport-
        edlymore‘natural’ortraditionaleconomicunits,namelythoseoffamily,
        territory, property and nation. Markets play an important role in this
        imaginary, but only to the extent that they conserve hierarchies and
        national identities, and not where they blur the boundaries of family,
        race and nation. A striking feature of these three papers is that, in each
        case, there is a rejection of the relativist, Hayekian faith in unplanned,
        competitive forces, and instead a commitment to protecting and nurtur-
        ing the ‘right’ producers, lifestyles and demographics. The state is repur-
        posed from a neoliberal one, which sets the ‘rules of the game’ but takes
        no interest in the outcome, to one that acts with explicit cultural, ethnic
        and economic biases. In that sense, the exit from neoliberalism is
        authentic.                                           
         On some level, the pandemic will serve to advance these agendas, at
        least by accelerating the tendency towards the repatriation of many
        supply chains and the much stricter regulation of migration. Yet the
        rhetoric, justifications and technologies of national bordering are likely
        to change significantly as a result of the pandemic. Already, the securing
        of Europe’s Mediterranean border has become defended according to a
        newlogicofupholdingthe‘safety’ofbothmigrantsandhostpopulations
        (Tazzioli and Stierl, 2021). The permeability of borders is becoming
        increasingly dictated by biopolitical calculations, overseen by a familiar
        litany of public-private partnerships, which draws consultants, outsour-
        cing contractors and data analysts into the government of humanmobil-
        ity (Amoore, 2013). Warnings against ‘vaccine nationalism’ have, as yet,
        not been well-heeded, while emergent varieties of health nationalism, as
        havealreadybeenmobilizedbysomepopulistmovements(seeFitzgerald
        et al., 2020), mesh with sovereign programs for the strengthening of
        borders more generally. As Foucault warned in Society Must Be
        Defended, a scientific nationalism – which is also a scientific racism –
        focuses the biopolitical force of the nation-state upon purification, seek-
        ing to safeguard health and vitality for some by denying it to others
        (Foucault, 2004).                                    
         Finally, the pandemic has brought the changing nature of public-pri-
        vate services and governance more clearly into view, but now with
        another corporate entity in play, namely platforms. Many analyses of
        neoliberal reforms of the late 20th century focused on the blurring
        ofstateandbusiness,asmanifestin‘newpublicmanagement’,discourses
        of ‘national competitiveness’, the rise of outsourcing industries, plus a

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      generalized ethic of enterprise that was pushed into all corners of social
      and political life. These are features of the ‘roll-out’ phase of neoliberal
      reform, in contrast to the ‘roll-back’ phase that took aim at organized
      labour and the welfare state (Peck and Tickell, 2002). The pandemic has
      undoubtedly clarified the sustained dominance and consequences of this
      longstanding reliance on market mechanisms for the provision of public
      goods. But even more so, it has demonstrated the infrastructural and
      unavoidable power of privately-owned digital platforms as conditions
      of social and economic life.                           
        Critical scholarly analysis of platforms has grown rapidly, since the
      consolidation of the ‘big five’ (Amazon, Facebook, Alphabet, Apple,
      Microsoft) around the time of the financial crisis (Gillespie, 2010;
      Srnicek, 2016; Dijck et al., 2018). The exceptional dominance of plat-
      forms is itself partly a side-effect of neoliberal reforms, in particular the
      success of the Chicago School critique of anti-trust that took hold in the
      courts and regulatory agencies in the US from the 1970s onwards, which
      made them more sympathetic to monopoly (Davies, 2010; Rahman and
      Thelen, 2019; Christophers, 2020). As ‘multi-sided markets’, and as pur-
      veyors of social connectivity, platforms have innate tendencies towards
      monopoly, which is tolerated to the extent that they exploit legal and
      normative grey areas, while allowing consumers to act as their public
      advocates (Langley and Leyshon, 2016; Culpepper and Thelen, 2020).
      Platforms are both ubiquitous and impossible to pin down in legal and
      regulatory terms, extracting data and rents from their pivotal position in
      sociallife,whichtheywereneverformallygranted.Thesebusinesseshave
      arguably exploited the emergency of the pandemic more than any other
      type of business, whether in relation to home-working, home-schooling,
      the gig economy, or retail.                            
        No account of the pandemic can possibly exclude the role performed
      byplatformsinsustaining(whilealsoreconfiguring)socialandeconomic
      life over the course of lockdowns and home confinements. The ‘big tech’
      platforms are owned and governed as corporations, and yet they have
      achievedastatusassocialinfrastructurethatgoeswellbeyondthetypical
      providers of a commercial service (Plantin et al., 2018). Conceived as a
      vast in vivo experiment, the pandemic has shown the extent to which
      work, retail, education and sociality can now survive the demise of high-
      streets, workplaces, schools, campuses and hospitality spaces, all thanks
      toplatforms.This‘discovery’willnotbeforgotteneasily,and–shouldit
      be seized as the basis for radical reforms over the coming years – it will
      castfreshemphasisonthepoliticsofthefamily,homeandhousehold,as
      the holding environment which shapes careers, learning, health and
      security.                                              
        According to Mirowski, it is a tenet of neoliberalism that ‘corpor-
      ations can do no wrong, or at least they are not to be blamed if they
      do’ (Mirowski, 2009: 438). American neoliberals abandoned their

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              21      
                                                             
        normative critique of monopoly from the 1950s onwards, and the US
        pressured European regulators to follow suit from the 1990s onwards.
        And yet, if a new form of capitalism is emerging, built around monop-
        olistic surveillance infrastructures, and with that business model coincid-
        ingwith(andinmanyinstancespartneringwith)renewedstateambitions
        for the surveillance, tracking, influencing and statistical modelling of
        populations, this raises questions as to the fates of liberal and libertarian
        wings of neoliberalism. What becomes of the heroic vision of the entre-
        preneurial, self-authored individual under these conditions? One answer
        maylurkinthecontributionofSmithandBurrows,whosepaperusesthe
        example of Urbit, a libertarian computing project that seeks to ‘redecen-
        tralize’ control over data. The ideology fuelling such innovations is one
        that seeks to reclaim individual sovereignty from both nation-states and
        corporations,infavourofaradicalautonomy,beyondthereachesofany
        centralized governance.                              
         The paranoid perception that a single ‘progressive’ class of elites and
        technocrats now runs the world, whether via states, corporations, media
        conglomerates or multilateral regulators, is common to many strands of
        libertarian critiques of contemporary neoliberalism. This is a major
        strandofFinlayson’scontributiontothisissue,whichexamineshowvari-
        ous online reactionary communities have organized and self-identified
        against the so-called ‘new class’ of liberal elites. This class is perceived
        to have attained a kind of political monopoly over political and cultural
        institutions,which itexploitstoimposeitsunnatural,culturallyrelativist
        and ‘Marxist’ ideology upon people, removing their freedom of speech
        and disrupting ‘natural’ gender identities. The goal of the online groups
        that mobilize against this class is to disrupt that monopoly, in a heroic
        moment of Schumpeterian creative destruction, of the sort that Trump
        represented to many of his fans.                     
         The more outlandish, sovereigntist movements (as explored by Smith
        andBurrows)dreamoffoundingwholenewsocietiesbeyondthereaches
        of states and corporations, and not just of disrupting the current ones.
        Nodoubtthe pandemic, and theescalation ofrules and surveillance that
        it has occasioned, will generate a host of new utopian visions of autono-
        mous individuality, beyond the reaches of the corporate platform or
        biosecurity state. But more visibly, and in the near term, the movements
        that react against the governmentality of COVID-19 are closer to those
        explored by Finlayson, characterized by a generalized suspicion towards
        politicians, experts, the media, ‘big pharma’ and ‘big tech’. In an intri-
        guing study of organized COVID scepticism in Germany, Callison and
        Slobodian (2021) pick out some of its salient features. Many activists are
        self-employed, politically unaligned and fearful of the perceived alliances
        between states, big business and the media, who they believe are lying to
        them. In that particular German context, many of the emerging ideo-
        logues of such movements hark back to Kant and the Enlightenment,

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      believingthatCOVIDhasunleashedanassaultonindividualfreedomof
      speech,thoughtandbehaviour.Thereis,asCallisonandSlobodianpoint
      out, a certain discomfort in the positioning of such movements, given
      thattheydependheavilyoninternetplatformsfortheircoordinationand
      veryexistence.Thisis,ironically,arevoltofthepetitebourgeoisie,whose
      conditions of possibility lie in SiliconValley’s vastcapitalization of data.
        COVID has undoubtedly unleashed some of the ‘same old’ neoliberal
      responses, including the kinds of ‘shock doctrine’ responses foreseen by
      Klein. Many recognized the pandemic as an opportunity or an ‘opening’
      through which commercial services could be pushed further into the
      delivery of public services and other basic social requirements.
      Ideologically, however, in an era of tightening national borders, escalat-
      ing surveillance of biosecurity threats, and massive fiscal expansion, it is
      hard to classify the present political conjuncture as ‘neoliberal’. The
      question, then, is where liberal, conservative or libertarian resistance to
      such political regimes will take root most strongly. Appeals to nation, to
      individual sovereignty, to democratic sovereignty, to racial and cultural
      hierarchy are all being made, as the papers in this issue explore in dif-
      ferent ways.                                           
      Conclusion                                             
                                                             
      By most definitions, ‘neoliberalism’ implies the use of state powers to
      expand and enforce market mechanisms and competition in society. In
      this introduction, and in the articles that follow, we can witness some
      manifest departures from and mutations (Callison and Manfredi, 2019)
      of this project. The victory of neoliberal ideas and reforms from the
      1970s onwards has led to scenarios in which the defence of the market
      isinthehandsoflargetechnocraticagenciesandmultilateralinstitutions,
      including central banks (Gane, 2015) and trade organizations
      (Slobodian, 2018) that, while positioning themselves as outside the
      formal arena of party politics, in fact continue politics by other means.
      Many of the rightwing critiques explored in this special issue target such
      institutions,onthebasisthattheyareelitist,‘progressive’,‘globalist’and
      implicitly disloyal to the more primary units of nation and family.
      Alongsidesuchconservativepositions,libertariancritics(writingonweb-
      sites such as Zerohedge), particularly in the US, have argued that gov-
      ernment interventions to stabilize and boost financial markets have
      distortednatural mechanisms of competition, andwith this theworkings
      of the price system.                                   
        This said, however, it is not clear whether neoliberal states or their
      libertarian critics remain committed to the defence of competitive,
      unplanned forces at all costs. Post-2008, libertarian critiques of (actually
      existing) neoliberalism have come to focus more on the sovereignty of
      propertyrightsandtheproperty-holderthanonseekingtodefendspaces
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              23      
                                                             
        of competition or exchange. And some prominent figures on the liber-
        tarian right, in particular Peter Thiel (see the article by Smith and
        Burrows), rather than seek to restore the natural equilibrium of the
        free market no longer see competition to be a natural force for the
        good of all but something believed in by ‘losers’ (Thiel, 2014). The
        task, for Thiel, is now to ‘capture and create last value’ by building
        monopolies. As Will Davies (2014) observes, this signals a shift from a
        neoliberal order defined by a commitment to competition and govern-
        mental enforcement of rules of the game to a different type of order in
        which winning at all costs becomes the primary objective (for further
        elaboration of this point see Gane, 2020). In such a world the values
        of democracy, equality and tolerance have been placed under renewed
        attack by new forms of authoritarian governance (as Geva documents in
        Hungary) and the play of big corporate powers. Even Hayek’s belief in
        the rule of law, which was so central to key books such as The
        Constitution of Liberty, is now rejected by those on the political right
        who seek exit from the regulatory powers of state and government,
        although it is worth noting that, for libertarian critics such as
        Rothbard (2009: 61–7), the rule of law was already part of the problem.
         Through the course of the current COVID crisis, the stability of the
        neoliberalorder,andwiththisthelegal‘encasement’oftheglobalmarket
        (Slobodian, 2018), looks increasingly uncertain. Regulatory and monet-
        aryinstitutions,whichintheneoliberalheydayofthe1990swereproudly
        agnostic regarding who should ‘win’ from the ‘global race’, have been
        gradually repurposed (or bypassed) over recent years to tackle crises of
        economic stagnation, social cohesion, COVID-19 and climate change.
        The difficulty is that these same institutions remain undemocratic by
        design, which adds fuel to the fire of those ‘populist’, anti-expert and
        anti-governmentalmovementswhichsuspectallpowerasbeingaformof
        conspiracy. To those on the nationalist or libertarian right, this merely
        confirms their suspicions about the political takeover that has been
        waged by technocrats, ‘globalists’ and elites since the 1980s.
         This special issue, then, is concerned not with a sudden disappearance
        ofneoliberalpolicyelites,instrumentsandinstitutions,butapopularand
        intellectual discrediting of them combined with belated attempts to
        repurpose them towards ends beyond the market. The isolation of eco-
        nomic policy-making from democracy (in areas such as monetary policy
        andantitrust)wasaclearaimofneoliberal intellectualsandpolicyrefor-
        mers. In the decade following the financial crisis, that same isolation
        became the basis of the legitimacy crisis that was exploited by anti-
        establishment parties across the liberal capitalist world (Hopkin, 2020).
        The question now is whether technocracies will be able to alleviate inter-
        locking social, ecological and health crises in time, and be recognized for
        doing so.                                            
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      24                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      ORCID iDs                                              
      William Davies https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9506-969X   
      NicholasGane https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8102-6509     
                                                             
      References                                             
                                                             
      Amoore L (2013) The Politics of Possibility: Risk and Security Beyond
        Probability. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.      
      Aron R (1994) The liberal definition of liberty: Concerning F.A. Hayek’s The
        Constitution of Liberty.In:Mahoney DJ(ed.)InDefense of Political Reason.
        Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield.                        
      Bowman A, Erturk I, Folkman P, Froud J, Haslam C, Johal S, Leaver A,
        Moran M and Tsitsianis N (2015) What a Waste: Outsourcing and How it
        Goes Wrong. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
      Brenner R (2020) Escalating plunder. New Left Review, May/June.
      Brown W (2015) Undoing the Demos. New York: Zone.      
      Brown W (2019) In the Ruins of Neoliberalism: The Rise of Antidemocratic
        Politics in the West. New York: Columbia University Press.
      Bruff I (2014) The rise of authoritarian neoliberalism. Rethinking Marxism
        26(1): 113–129.                                      
      Burgin A (2012) The Great Persuasion: Reinventing Free Markets since the
        Depression. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
      Callison WandManfrediZ(2020)Introduction: Theorizing mutantneoliberal-
        ism. In: Callison W and Manfredi Z (eds) Mutant Neoliberalism. New York:
        Fordham University Press.                            
      Callison W and Slobodian Q (2021) Coronapolitics from the Reichstag to the
        Capitol. Boston Review. Available at: https://bostonreview.net/politics/wil-
        liam-callison-quinn-slobodian-coronapolitics-reichstag-capitol (accessed 10
        August 2021).                                        
      Calvert J and Arbuthnott G (2021) Failures of State: The Inside Story of
        Britain’s Battle with Coronavirus. New York: HarperCollins.
      Christophers B (2020) Rentier Capitalism: Who Owns the Economy, and Who
        Pays for It? New York: Verso Books.                  
      Cooper M (2017) Family Values. New York: Zone.         
      Cooper M (2021) The Alt-right: Neoliberalism, libertarianism and the fascist
        temptation. Theory, Culture & Society 38(6): 29–50.  
      Cooper M and Konings M (2015) Contingency and foundation: Rethinking
        money, debt, and finance after the crisis. South Atlantic Quarterly 114(2):
        239–250.                                             
      CulpepperPDandThelenK(2020)AreweallAmazonPrimed?Consumersand
        the politics of platform power. Comparative Political Studies 53(2): 288–318.
      DardotPandLavalC(2014)TheNewWayoftheWorld:OnNeoliberalSociety.
        New York: Verso.                                     
      DaviesW(2010)Economicsandthe‘nonsense’oflaw:ThecaseoftheChicago
        antitrust revolution. Economy and Society 39(1): 64. 

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              25      
                                                             
        DaviesW(2013)Whenisamarketnotamarket?:‘Exemption’,‘externality’and
         ‘exception’inthecaseofEuropeanstateaidrules.Theory,Culture&Society
         30(2): 32–59.                                       
        Davies W (2014) The Limits of Neoliberalism. London: SAGE.
        Davies W (2021) The revenge of sovereignty on government? The release of
         neoliberal politics from economics post-2008. Theory, Culture & Society
         38(6): 95–118.                                      
        DijckJvan,PoellTandWaalMde(2018)ThePlatformSociety:PublicValues
         in a Connective World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
        DurandC(2021)1979inreverse.Sidecar,1June.Availableat:https://newleftre-
         view.org/sidecar/posts/1979-in-reverse (accessed 17 June 2021).
        FinlaysonA(2021)Neoliberalism,theAlt-rightandtheIntellectualDarkWeb.
         Theory, Culture & Society 38(6): 167–190.           
        Fitzgerald D, Hinterberger A, Narayan J and Williams R (2020) Brexit as her-
         edity redux: Imperialism, biomedicine and the NHS in Britain. The
         Sociological Review 0038026120914177.               
        FoucaultM(2004)SocietyMustbeDefended:LecturesattheColle`gedeFrance,
         1975–76. London: Penguin.                           
        Foucault M (2007) Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Colle`ge de
         France, 1977–78. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
        Foucault M (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
        Gane N (2015) Central banking, technocratic governance and the financial
         crisis: Placing quantitative easing into question. Sosiologia 15: 381–396.
        GaneN(2016)Inandoutofneoliberalism.JournalofClassicalSociology16(3):
         261–279.                                            
        Gane N (2020) Competition: A critical history of a concept. Theory, Culture &
         Society 37(2): 31–59.                               
        Gane N (2021) Nudge economics as libertarian paternalism. Theory, Culture &
         Society 38(6): 119–142.                             
        Geva D (2021) Orba´n’s ordonationalism as post-neoliberal hegemony. Theory,
         Culture & Society 38(6): 71–93.                     
        Gillespie T (2010) The politics of ‘platforms’. New Media & Society 12(3):
         347–364.                                            
        Hall PA (1993) Policy paradigms, social learning, and the state: The case of
         economic policymaking in Britain. Comparative Politics 25(3): 275–296.
        Harvey D (2005) A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.                                              
        Hayek F (1944) The Road to Serfdom. London: Routledge.
        HayekF(1948)IndividualismandEconomicOrder.Chicago:ChicagoUniversity
         Press.                                              
        Hayek F (1960) The Constitution of Liberty. London: Routledge.
        Hayek F (1967) Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics. London:
         Routledge.                                          
        Hayek F (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty. London: Routledge.
        Hayek F (1976) The Denationalization of Money. London: IEA.
        Hendrikse R (2018) Neo-illiberalism. Geoforum 95: 169–172.

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      26                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Hopkin J (2020) Anti-system Politics: The Crisis of Market Liberalism in Rich
        Democracies. London: Polity.                         
      Hopkin J and Blyth M (2019) The global economics of European populism:
        Growth regimes and party system change in Europe (The Government and
        Opposition/Leonard Schapiro Lecture 2017). Government and Opposition
        54(2): 193–225.                                      
      Ingham G (2020) Money. Cambridge: Polity.              
      JonesLandHameiriS(2021)COVID-19andthefailureoftheneoliberalregu-
        latory state. Review of International Political Economy. DOI: 10.1080/
        09692290.2021.1892798.                               
      Klein N (2020) How big tech plans to profit from the pandemic. The Guardian,
        13 May. Available at: http://www.theguardian.com/news/2020/may/13/
        naomi-klein-how-big-tech-plans-to-profit-from-coronavirus-pandemic
        (accessed 10 August 2021).                           
      Langley P and Leyshon A (2016) Platform capitalism: The intermediation and
        capitalisation of digital economic circulation. Finance and Society. Available
        at:  http://financeandsociety.ed.ac.uk/ojs-images/financeandsociety/FS_
        EarlyView_LangleyLeyshon.pdf (accessed 10 August 2021).
      Lonergan E and Blyth M (2020) Angrynomics. New York: Agenda Publishing/
        Columbia University Press.                           
      Marmot M, et al. (2020) Build Back Fairer: The COVID-19 Marmot Review.
        London: Institute of Health Equity.                  
      MirowskiP(2009)Postface:DefiningNeoliberalism.In:MirowskiPandPlehwe
        D(eds)TheRoadFromMontPelerin.Cambridge:HarvardUniversityPress.
      Mirowski P (2013) Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism
        Survived the Financial Meltdown. New York: Verso Books.
      Mirowski P (2020) How neoliberalism will exploit the coronavirus crisis.
        Tribune, 18 May. Available at: https://tribunemag.co.uk/2020/05/how-neoli-
        beralism-will-exploit-the-coronavirus-crisis (accessed 10 August 2021).
      MirowskiPandPlehweD(2009)TheRoadfromMontPe`lerin:TheMakingofthe
        Neoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Mitchell T (1998) Fixing the economy. Cultural Studies 12: 82–101.
      PanaTA, Bhattacharya S,Gamble DT, PasdarZ, SzlachetkaWA,etal.(2021)
        Country-level determinants of the severity of the first global wave of the
        COVID-19 pandemic: An ecological study. BMJ Open 11(2): e042034.
      Peck J (2010) Zombie neoliberalism and the ambidextrous state. Theoretical
        Criminology 14(1): 104–110.                          
      Peck J and Theodore N (2019) Still neoliberalism? South Atlantic Quarterly
        118(2): 245–265.                                     
      Peck J and Tickell A (2002) Neoliberalizing space. Antipode 34(3): 380–404.
      Peck J, Theodore N and Brenner N (2010) Postneoliberalism and its malcon-
        tents. Antipode 41: 94–116.                          
      PlantinJ-C,LagozeC,EdwardsPNandSandvigC(2018)Infrastructurestudies
        meet platform studies in the age of Google and Facebook. New Media &
        Society 20(1): 293–310.                              
      Rahman KS and Thelen K (2019) The rise of the platform business model and
        thetransformationoftwenty-first-centurycapitalism.Politics&Society47(2):
        177–204.                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies and Gane                              27      
                                                             
        Reinhoudt J and Audier S (2018) The Walter Lippmann Colloquium.
         Basingstoke: Palgrave.                              
        Rhodes RAW (1996) The new governance: Governing without government.
         Political Studies XLIV: 652–667.                    
        Ro¨pke W (1960) A Humane Economy. Chicago: Regnery.  
        Ro¨pke W (1965) South Africa: A Positive Appraisal. Information Service of
         South Africa.                                       
        Rose N (2017) Still ‘like birds on the wire’? Freedom after neoliberalism.
         Economy and Society 46(3–4): 303–323.               
        Rothbard M (1995) Classical Economics. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
        Rothbard M (2009) Murray N. Rothbard vs. the Philosophers. Auburn, AL:
         Mises Institute.                                    
        Saad-Filho A (2020) From COVID-19 to the end of neoliberalism. Critical
         Sociology 46(4–5): 477–485.                         
        Slobodian Q (2018) Globalists. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
        Slobodian Q (2021) The backlash against neoliberal globalization from above:
         Elite origins of the crisis of the new constitutionalism. Theory, Culture &
         Society 38(6): 51–69.                               
        Smith H and Burrows R (2021) Software, sovereignty and the post-neoliberal
         politics of exit. Theory, Culture & Society 38(6): 143–166.
        Springer S (2014) Postneoliberalism? Review of Radical Political Economics
         47(1): 5–17.                                        
        Srnicek N (2016) Platform Capitalism. Oxford: Wiley. 
        Stedman Jones D (2012) Masters of the Universe. Princeton: Princeton
         University Press.                                   
        Tazzioli M and and Stierl M (2021) Europe’s unsafe environment: Migrant
         confinement under COVID-19. Critical Studies on Security 9(1): 76–80.
        Thiel P (2014) Competition is for losers. Wall Street Journal, 12 September.
         Available at: https://www.wsj.com/articles/peter-thiel-competition-is-for-
         losers-1410535536 (accessed 10 August 2021).        
        Tooze A(2018) Crashed:How a Decadeof Financial Crises Changedthe World.
         London: Penguin UK.                                 
        Tooze A (2020) How coronavirus almost brought down the global financial
         system. The Guardian, 14 April. Available at: http://www.theguardian.com/
         business/2020/apr/14/how-coronavirus-almost-brought-down-the-global-
         financial-system (accessed 10 August 2021).         
        Whyte J (2019) The Morals of the Market. London: Verso.
        William Davies is Professor of Political Economy at Goldsmiths,
        University of London. He is author most recently of This Is Not
        Normal: The Collapse of Liberal Britain (Verso, 2020), and also of
        Nervous States: How Feeling Took Over the World (Jonathan Cape,
        2018), The Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big Business
        Sold Us Wellbeing (Verso, 2015) and The Limits of Neoliberalism:
        Sovereignty, Authority and the Logic of Competition (SAGE, 2014). He
        is a regular contributor to The London Review of Books and The
        Guardian.                                            

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                            Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Nicholas Gane is Professor of Sociology at the University of Warwick,
      UK. His recent publications includearticles oncompetition, debt, usury,
      and the history of neoliberalism.                      
                                                             
      This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘Post-
      Neoliberalism?’, edited by William Davies and Nicholas Gane.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             