[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Section: TCS Website Highlights              
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                            2014,Vol.31(7/8)309–317
        Neoliberalism:                                       
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2014
                                             Reprintsandpermissions:
        A  Bibliographic   Review                            
                                        sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276414546383
                                                tcs.sagepub.com
        William Davies                                       
        Goldsmiths, Universityof London                      
        Abstract                                             
        In recent years, there has been a surge in critical and historical work, dedicated to
        uncovering the roots of neoliberal thinking. In the process, the concept of ‘neo-
        liberalism’ has become used in a far more nuanced way, contrary to the frequent
        allegation that it is merely a pejorative slogan used against capitalism generally. This
        bibliographic review identifies the texts that have mapped out this more sophisti-
        cated account of neoliberalism, and which distinguish between its different varieties
        and trajectories. In particular, the recognition that neoliberalism is not simply about
        laissez-faireeconomicsbecomesabasisonwhichtointerrogateneoliberalismmore
        sociologically, learning especially from Foucault’s lectures on the topic. The review
        concludes by identifying those texts which point towards possible futures for
        neoliberalism.                                       
        Keywords                                             
        competitiveness, economics, government, neoliberalism, ordoliberalism, state
                                                             
                                                             
        The term ‘neoliberalism’ has become increasingly familiar over recent
        years. The term was relatively unheard of until the 1990s, when it was
        adopted principally by the critics of a perceived free market orthodoxy
        which was spreading around the world under the auspices of the
        ‘Washington Consensus’. The ‘anti-globalization movement’, which
        rose to prominence with the 1999 Seattle protests against the World
        Trade Organization, further advanced the pejorative sense of neoliberal-
        ism as a form of market fundamentalism, imposed upon developing
        nationsbytheUSgovernmentandmultilateralinstitutions.Theassump-
        tion underlying this account of neoliberalism was typically that it arose
        with the elections of ‘new right’ political leaders, Margaret Thatcher and
        Ronald Reagan in particular, in the late 1970s and early ’80s. But there
        wasrelativelylittlescholarlyworkdoneatthistimeonthelongerhistory
        of neoliberal thought preceding that political shift.
        Correspondingauthor:WilliamDavies.Email:williamdavies10@gmail.com
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      310                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
        The beginning of the global financial crisis in the summer of
      2007 drew fresh attention to the meaning and history of neoliberalism,
      while also highlighting the priority that neoliberal policy accords to
      financial markets and financial institutions. The fact that this crisis
      emanated from an apparent centre and driver of neoliberalism,
      namely Wall Street, shifted the focus away from the neo-colonial, glo-
      balizing aspects of neoliberal reform, towards the question of neo-
      liberalism’s core rationalities and genealogy. Partly for this reason, no
      doubt, a wave of new scholarly work appeared, which paid far closer
      attention to the longer history of neoliberal thought, as far back as the
      1920s. This includes work on think tanks, such as the Mont Pelerin
      Society, and academic traditions, such as the Chicago School of
      economics.                                             
        In an effort to get away from the simply pejorative use of the term
      neoliberalism,whichcanbeattachedindiscriminatelytovariousformsof
      anti-democraticorpro-corporatepower,themorehistoricistapproachto
      the concept highlights its fluidity and contingent development. However,
      this approach also risks lapsing into pure historical description, without
      critique or an account of how ideas translate into policies and strategies.
      Others apply a more sociological and critical method, which aims to
      examine which aspects of neoliberalism are at work amongst elites and
      governments today. This poses the question of precisely how much of
      neoliberalism has survived the global financial crisis, and through what
      means this survival has been achieved.                 
        Definitions of neoliberalism across these literatures are various. But
      they tend to share four things:                        
      1. Victorian liberalism is viewed as an inspiration for neoliberalism, but not a
        model.Neoliberalismisaninventive,constructivist,modernizingforce,which
        aims to produce a new social and political model, and not to recover an old
        one. Neoliberalism is not a conservative or nostalgic project.
      2. Following this, neoliberal policy targets institutions and activities which lie
        outsideofthemarket,suchasuniversities,households,publicadministrations
        andtradeunions.Thismaybesoastobringtheminsidethemarket,through
        actsofprivatization; ortoreinventthem ina‘market-like’ way;orsimplyto
        neutralize or disband them.                          
      3. To do this, the state must be an active force, and cannot simply rely on
        ‘market forces’. This is where the distinction from Victorian liberalism is
        greatest. Neoliberal states are required to produce and reproduce the rules
        of institutions and individual conduct, in ways that accord with a certain
        ethical and political vision.                        
      4. This ethical and political vision is dominated by an idea of competitive
        activity, that is, the production of inequality. Competition and inequality
        are valued positively under neoliberalism, as a non-socialist principle for
        society in general, through which value and scientific knowledge can best
        be pursued.                                          

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies                                       311     
                                                             
         This bibliographic essay focuses on texts drawn from sociology, his-
        tory of economics and more historical or cultural traditions of political
        economy, to look at the ideas, rationalities and policies through which
        neoliberalism is constructed and sustained. It does not address the
        political-economic question of how neoliberal economies have actually
        performed empirically.                               
                                                             
                                                             
        Pioneers of Neoliberal Thought                       
                                                             
        The origins of neoliberalism can be traced back to the years preceding
        the Great Depression, and to the writings of Ludwig von Mises criticiz-
        ing the rationality of socialism. This work, which catalysed the ‘socialist
        calculation debate’ of the 1920s and ’30s, and to which Friedrich von
        Hayek was also a contributor, involved a renewal of the case for eco-
        nomic liberalism. Liberalism as exemplified by Victorian laissez-faire
        was perceived to have peaked around 1870 but has been in decline
        ever since, with the rise of corporations, trade unions, social policies,
        regulation and state socialism. The task faced by Mises, Hayek and
        those that supported them was to re-imagine economic liberalism in
        ways that either accommodated these new developments or could effect-
        ively rebuff them.                                   
         The 1930s exacerbated perceived anti-liberal trends, with the
        appearance of protectionism, macroeconomics, the New Deal in the
        United States and totalitarianism in Europe. These developments
        heightened the anxiety of liberals in these countries, who set about
        reinventing the argument for the price system of the market, in a
        similar spirit to how Mises had done. In 1938, the French philosopher
        Louis Rougier organized the Colloque Walter Lippmann in Paris, in
        honour of the American journalist who was a vocal critic of the New
        Deal. This occasion is thought to be the first time when the term
        ‘neoliberalism’ was used.                            
         During and after the Second World War, the shape of neoliberal
        thought and advocacy would become clearer. 1944 saw the publication
        of Hayek’s bestseller, The Road to Serfdom, which served as a popular
        introductionto neoliberal ideasfor decades.In1947,Hayekfoundedthe
        MontPelerinSociety,asathinktankandnetworkforliberalintellectuals
        from around the world. Think tanks would go on to serve as a crucial
        conduit between neoliberal thinkers and policy-makers. The post-war
        period saw a growing split between a European strand of neoliberalism
        (or ‘ordoliberalism’) and the American strand.       
        References                                           
        Burgin A (2012) The Great Persuasion: Reinventing Free Markets since the
         Depression. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      312                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      Gane N (2013) The emergence of neoliberalism: Thinking through and beyond
        Michel Foucault’s lectures on biopolitics. Theory, Culture & Society 31(4):
        3–27.                                                
      GaneN(2014)Sociologyandneoliberalism:Amissinghistory.Sociology48(1).
        DOI: 10.1177/0038038513512728.                       
      Mirowski P and Plehwe D (eds) (2009) The Road from Mont Pelerin: The
        Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.                                    
      Phillips-Fein K (2009) Invisible Hands: The Making of the Conservative
        Movement from the New Deal to Reagan. Indonesia: Yayasan Obor.
      PolanyiK(1957)TheGreatTransformation:ThePoliticalandEconomicOrigins
        of our Times. Boston: Beacon Press.                  
      Stedman-JonesD(2012)MastersoftheUniverse:Hayek,FriedmanandtheBirth
        of Neoliberal Politics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
                                                             
      Ordoliberalism and the ‘Social Market’                 
                                                             
      Up until the 1950s, many neoliberal thinkers assumed that large elem-
      ents of socialism, or at least social democracy, were inevitable and
      necessary. The task, therefore, was to find a space for the free
      market alongside institutions of social security and strong rule of
      law. In Germany, this position was advanced by the school of ordo-
      liberalism, which had emerged in Freiburg in the 1930s, under the
      leadership of Walter Eucken and around the journal Ordo. The ordo-
      liberals were principally lawyers and liberal philosophers, who sub-
      scribed to a neo-Kantian epistemology, and believed that law should
      be used to impose formal ideas upon society. The idea of competition,
      as manifest in the free market, was viewed as a guarantor of political
      rights, but could not be safeguarded by the market alone. The state
      was therefore necessary to enforce a competitive order, through active
      and normative anti-trust enforcement. This legally-mandated market
      was entirely compatible with strong institutions of social security
      and public provision, producing what was known as the ‘social
      market’.                                               
        Hayek was initially very sympathetic to the ordoliberal position.
      Eucken and his colleagues were influential in designing thereconstructed
      German economy in the late 1940s. The inclusion of strong antitrust
      provisions in the 1949 German constitution and the 1957 Treaty of
      Rome (forming the European Community) are viewed partly as ordolib-
      eral achievements.                                     
      References                                             
      Bonefeld W (2012) Freedom and the strong state: On German ordoliberalism.
        New Political Economy 17(5): 633–656.                
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies                                       313     
                                                             
        GerberD(1994)Constitutionalizingtheeconomy:Germanneo-liberalism,com-
         petitionlawandthe‘new’Europe.TheAmericanJournalofComparativeLaw
         42(1): 25–84.                                       
        Labrousse A and Weisz J-D (2001) Institutional Economics in France and
         Germany: German Ordoliberalism versus the French Regulation School. New
         York: Springer.                                     
        NorrK(1996)Ontheconceptofthe‘economicconstitution’andtheimportance
         ofFranzBo¨hmfromtheviewpointoflegalhistory.EuropeanJournalofLaw
         and Economics 3(4): 345–356.                        
        PtakR(2009)NeoliberalisminGermany:Revisitingtheordoliberalfoundations
         of the social market economy. In: Mirowski P and Plehwe D (eds) The Road
         from Mont Pelerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective.
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.            
                                                             
        The Chicago School and economic ‘imperialism’        
                                                             
        The Chicago School of economics would exert a strong influence over
        applied neoliberal policies from the 1970s onwards. Through extending
        neo-classical economics into new domains of social and individual life,
        through categories such as ‘human capital’, it has arguably contributed
        to the construction of neoliberal subjectivity more broadly. In its early
        years of the 1920s and ’30s, the Chicago School of economics was not
        especially known for its liberalism, although its first generation members
        (FrankKnightandJacobViner)arecreditedwithintroducinganaggres-
        sive and sceptical style of reasoning which inspired a number of the
        second generation, notably Milton Friedman and George Stigler.
        This second generation, initially led by Aaron Director, is principally
        known for a resolute belief in the capacity of economics to explain all
        forms of human behaviour, whether inside or outside of markets. For
        thisreason,theyhavebeencriticizedas‘economicimperialists’withinthe
        academy.                                             
         TheChicagoSchooldepartedfromthenormativeandidealistperspec-
        tiveofmanyoftheEuropeanneoliberalsoverthecourseofthe1950s.In
        particular, they became increasingly sceptical of regulation, and devel-
        oped an argument for the potential efficiency of monopoly and non-
        market agreements; this argument was influential in American antitrust
        authorities from the mid-1970s onwards. In macroeconomics, Friedman
        predicted the demise of Keynesianism, and developed the case for mon-
        etarismthatwastakenupinthelate1970s.Andinapplyingneo-classical
        economics to ‘social’ phenomena such as education, crime and the
        family, Gary Becker pre-figured a certain type of calculative vision of
        psychology that many view as the most transformative achievement of
        neoliberalism. In this respect, the Chicago School can be viewed as heirs
        to Jeremy Bentham.                                   
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      314                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      References                                             
      DaviesW(2010)Economicsandthe‘nonsense’oflaw:ThecaseoftheChicago
        antitrust revolution. Economy & Society 39(1): 64–83.
      EngelmannS(2003)ImaginingInterestinPoliticalThought:OriginsofEconomic
        Rationality. Durham: Duke University Press.          
      Fine B and Milonakis D (2009) From Economics Imperialism to Freakonomics:
        The Shifting Boundaries Between Economics and Other Social Sciences.
        London: Routledge.                                   
      Nik-KahEandVanHornR(2012)Inlandempire:Economicsimperialismasan
        imperativeofChicagoneoliberalism.JournalofEconomicMethodology19(3):
        259–282.                                             
      Van Horn R (2011) Chicago’s shifting attitude toward concentrations of busi-
        ness power (1934–1962). Seattle Law Review 34(4).    
      Van Horn R and Mirowski P (2009) The rise of the Chicago School of
        Economics. In: Mirowski P and Plehwe D (eds) The Road from Mont
        Pelerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought Collective. Cambridge, MA:
        Harvard University Press.                            
      VanHornRetal.(eds)(2013)BuildingChicagoEconomics:NewPerspectiveson
        the History of America’s Most Powerful Economics Program. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Neoliberalism in Action                                
                                                             
      ThecrisisofKeynesianmacroeconomics(occasionedbytheriseof‘stag-
      flation’ in the early 1970s) and of Fordist production (symptomized by
      declining productivity growth and profitability) created an opportunity
      for a new paradigm of economic policy-making. This was initially
      exploited in the United States and the United Kingdom, before policies
      were exported internationally via multilateral institutions and economic
      experts. Prior to this breakthrough, the Chicago School had already
      shaped the policy regime of Pinochet in Chile, thanks to the training of
      Chilean economists in Chicago and the advice provided by Friedman to
      the government.                                        
        Marxistanalysesofappliedneoliberalismviewitasthemobilizationof
      thestate,soastorestoretherateofprofit.Tothisend,theneoliberalstate
      targets inflation through deflationary, monetarist policies, and targets
      trade union power through legislation, police power and privatization.
      The effect of this is far greater returns to capital, and lower returns to
      labour, resulting in dramatic increases in inequality from the 1980s
      onwards. With declining investment opportunities following the crisis of
      Fordist-Keynesianism,theneoliberalstatediscoversnon-productivepaths
      toprivateprofit,inhouseholds,thepublicsectorandfinancialsector.
        Analyses that are more influenced by post-structuralism, by Foucault
      in particular, look at neoliberalism more as an attempt to remake social
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies                                       315     
                                                             
        and personal life in its entirety, around an ideal of enterprise and per-
        formance. Here, an ethos of competitiveness is seen as permeating cul-
        ture, education, personal relations and orientation to the self, in ways
        thatrenderinequalityafundamentalindicatorofethicalworthordesire.
        For many such theorists, economists themselves are viewed as political
        actors who extend the limits of calculability. The state remains a central
        actor, according to this perspective, in forcing institutions to reinvent
        themselves and measure themselves according to this vision of agency.
        Distinctive neoliberal policies are those which encourage individuals,
        communities, students and regions to exert themselves competitively,
        and produce ‘scores’ of who is winning and losing.   
         A common theme between the Marxist and the post-structuralist
        accounts of neoliberalism is the rising power and authority of corpor-
        ate and quasi-corporate actors and experts in public life. During the
        1990s, the sense that social life was increasingly regulated by non-state
        intermediaries or private firms led to increased awareness of ‘govern-
        ance’, ‘governmentality’ and risk as techniques for managing
        neoliberal or ‘advanced liberal’ societies in a calculated fashion.
        Arguably it is the managerial freedom of corporate and quasi-corpo-
        rate actors which is maximized under applied neoliberalism, and not
        markets as such.                                     
        References                                           
        Amable B (2011) Morals and politics in the ideology of neo-liberalism. Socio-
         Economic Review 9(1): 3–30.                         
        BabbS(2001)ManagingMexico:EconomistsfromNationalismtoNeoliberalism.
         Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.          
        DardotPandLavalC(2014)TheNewWayoftheWorld:OnNeoliberalSociety.
         London: Verso.                                      
        Davies W (2014) The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the
         Logic of Competition. London: SAGE.                 
        Foucault M (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Colle`ge de France,
         1978–79. Basingstoke: Palgrave.                     
        Gamble A (1988) The Free Economy & The Strong State: The Politics of
         Thatcherism. Durham: Duke University Press.         
        Harvey D (2005) A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.                                              
        MirowskiP(2009)Postface:Definingneoliberalism.In:MirowskiPandPlehweD
         (eds) The Road from Mont Pelerin: The Making of the Neoliberal Thought
         Collective. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
        Peck J (2010) Constructions of Neoliberal Reason. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.                                              
        RoseN(1996)Thedeathofthesocial?Re-figuringtheterritoryofgovernment.
         Economy and Society 25(3): 327–356.                 
        ValdesJ(1995)Pinochet’sEconomists:TheChicagoSchoolinChile.Cambridge:
         Cambridge University Press.                         

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      316                          Theory, Culture & Society 31(7/8)
                                                             
      Financial Crisis and the Future of Neoliberalism       
                                                             
      In the years following the global financial crisis of 2007–9, and the sub-
      sequent ‘Great Recession’, a couple of different slants appeared in the
      research on neoliberalism. First, there was a heightened awareness that
      applied neoliberalism has in practice translated into ‘financialization’.
      This means that profits made in the financial sector account for an
      ever-greater share of profitability overall, made thanks to financial
      deregulation and growing household, consumer and student indebted-
      ness. The banking bail-outs of 2008 highlighted the crucial role of the
      state in under-writing the financial sector, to allow for privatization of
      gains and socialization of losses. In place of profitable production, neo-
      liberalism discovers sources of profit through expanding risk calculus
      into non-productive areas of social life, which can then be drawn into
      thefinancialeconomy.Whenittranspiresthatsomeoftheseriskscannot
      be handled by the private financial economy, they are transferred to the
      state. The complex neoliberal symbiosis between state and corporations
      (in this case, banks) attains a new form.              
        Second,theenduranceofneoliberalismisitselfamatterwhichrequires
      explanation. The global financial crisis appears to have resulted in a
      strengthening, and not a weakening, of neoliberalism and the experts
      that propagate it. States appear even more committed to defending the
      interests of finance, against other political interests, and increasing the
      reach of finance into everyday life. Meanwhile, state borrowing is repre-
      sented as the cause of the crisis, rather than the result, leading to further
      dismantling of social protections and public sector institutions. On the
      other hand, the ideology, legitimacy or hegemony of neoliberalism, as a
      systemdedicated to equalopportunity, enterprise and wealth-creation, is
      now far weaker than before the crisis. There is thus some debate as to
      whether neoliberalism is ‘alive’, ‘dead’ or in some paradoxical ‘zombie’
      state.                                                 
      References                                             
      Crouch C (2011) The Strange Non-Death of Neoliberalism. London: Polity.
      DaviesW(2013)Whenisamarketnotamarket?‘Exemption’,‘externality’and
        ‘exception’inthecaseofEuropeanstateaidrules.Theory,Culture&Society
        30(2): 32–59.                                        
      Engelen E, et al. (2011) After the Great Complacence: Financial Crisis and the
        Politics of Reform. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
      Gamble A (2009) The Spectre at the Feast: Capitalist Crisis and the Politics of
        Recession. Basingstoke: Palgrave.                    
      Krippner G (2012) Capitalizing on Crisis: The Political Origins of the Rise of
        Finance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.    
      Mirowski P (2013) Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste: How Neoliberalism
        Survived the Financial Meltdown. London: Verso.      
      Peck J et al. (2010) Postneoliberalism and its malcontents. Antipode 41.

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Davies                                       317     
                                                             
        Streeck W (2011) The crises of democratic capitalism. New Left Review 71
         (Oct–Nov).                                          
                                                             
        William Davies was Assistant Professor at the Centre for
        Interdisciplinary Methodologies, University of Warwick, until March
        2014 and is now Senior Lecturer at Goldsmiths, University of London.
        Hisresearchlooksatthesociologyandhistoryofeconomicthought,and
        its influence over public policy-making. His book The Limits of
        Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the Logic of Competition is
        published by SAGE (2014) in association with Theory, Culture &
        Society. He is currently working on a second book on the history of
        Benthamite psychological measurement, to be published by Verso in
        2015. His weblog is at www.potlatch.org.uk           
        This commentary is part of a Special Section on Highlights from the
        TheoryCulture&Societywebsite–anopenaccessversionisalsoavailable
        at: theoryculturesociety.org                         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             