[PAGE 1]
 1316403                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251316403Theory, Culture & SocietyDavies
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Another  Age  of Anxiety:               2025, Vol. 42(5) 3 –20
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Psychological Distress and                            
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       the ‘Asset Economy’                sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153131166440033
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       William Davies                                        
       Goldsmiths, University of London                      
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Rates of ‘anxiety disorder’ have risen rapidly in the 21st century, provoking much public
       debate as to the causes. However, despite attending to varieties of mental distress over
       its history, sociology has said little about the context of this ‘epidemic’. By contrast,
       the rise of depression and anti-depressants in the 1980s has been viewed by cultural
       theorists and critics as a distinctly neoliberal affliction, that casts light on its sociological
       context. Too often, both in critical and non-critical discourses, the distinction between
       ‘depression’ and ‘anxiety’ has been elided. The article seeks to take anxiety seriously as
       a distinct contemporary sociological phenomenon. To do this, it examines how anxiety
       has been framed in the past by existentialist and psychoanalytic traditions, then how
       this history was systematically eliminated by the medicalization of psychiatry. It then
       considers how the sociology of assets and assetization might provide an explanatory
       context for contemporary anxiety ‘disorders’.         
       Keywords                                              
       anxiety, assets, depression, neoliberalism, psychoanalysis, social theory, sociology
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       As a diagnostic category, ‘anxiety’ has a claim to being one of the greatest contributors
       to ill-health and distress in the world today. Anxiety disorders have become the most
       common of all mental health disorders globally, while the contribution of mental ill-
       health to the overall ‘burden of disease’ continues to rise (World Health Organization,
       2023). In the UK and the US, diagnoses of anxiety disorders started to rise precipitously
       after 2008, disproportionately afflicting women and young people (Goodwin et al., 2020;
       Slee et al., 2021). The everyday struggles of those who feel unable to go to school,
       socialize with others, leave the house, attend a lecture, or be in a busy public place are
       now part of the tapestry of families and institutions, requiring a range of techniques of
       coping and care. Why there is so much anxiety is a matter of widespread public concern
                                                             
       Corresponding author: William Davies. Email: w.davies@gold.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      and debate, producing a cottage industry of self-help literature, ‘talking cures’, ‘wellness
      hacks’, not to mention pharmaceutical innovation and marketing.
        Independently of medical perspectives, the concept of anxiety has long denoted a type
      of unfounded fear that afflicts the body (especially the chest) and the mind simultane-
      ously. Many of its symptoms (such as accelerated heart rate) may have beneficial func-
      tions in genuinely dangerous situations, but become deemed ‘irrational’ or ‘disordered’
      when they appear in apparently unthreatening contexts (Horwitz and Wakefield, 2012).
      It is the lack of any clear object that distinguishes an anxiety disorder from what might
      be deemed a ‘normal’ or ‘healthy’ fear. In the context of medicalized psychiatry, ‘anxiety
      disorders’ have become associated with the presence of ‘worries’ that are persistent, dif-
      ficult to control or ‘excessive’, and therefore become an impediment to everyday activi-
      ties (Rickels and Rynn, 2001; Crocq, 2017). But the phenomenon of anxiety, or ‘angst’,
      has also been viewed as a mood to which the modern individual is particularly prone.
      Existentialists have seen anxiety as emerging from the fundamentally arbitrary nature of
      human freedom, in a world stripped of traditional identities and rituals (Heidegger, 1962;
      Kierkegaard, 2014). Absent tradition and fixed community, individuals are left strug-
      gling to find meaning and purpose from within their own selves, a project that leaves
      them feeling isolated and anxious, struggling to turn contingent decisions into a coherent
      narrative (Taylor, 1992; Giddens, 2013; Rebughini, 2021).
        Sociologists and social theorists have attended to such phenomena in the past.
      Identifying the broader political, economic and social logics behind the distribution of
      distress and alienation is one of the primary vocations on which these disciplines have
      been built (Durkheim, 1952; Mills, 2000). A recognition that individualism and secular-
      ism are potentially disorienting and frightening is built into a long tradition of critique
      (e.g. Fromm, 1995). And in recent years, critical theorists have treated rates of ‘depres-
      sion’ as means of interrogating and criticizing neoliberal capitalism (Fisher, 2009;
      Cederström and Fleming 2012). But sociologists and social theorists have said surpris-
      ingly little about a type of distress that has become endemic, especially since the Global
      Financial Crisis (GFC) of 2008. One reason for this is that there are two distinct termi-
      nological registers at work, which may appear to have little overlap. There is ‘anxiety’ as
      it has been variously understood by philosophers, psychoanalysts, social theorists and
      individuals themselves, a concept with rich hermeneutic potential, reflecting on ethics,
      secularization and the human condition itself. Then there are ‘anxiety disorders’, diag-
      nostic categories that are applied to specific sets of symptoms in a clinical setting, for
      various governmental purposes (see Rose, 2013). When we speak of statistical rates of
      anxiety, what we really mean is rates of ‘anxiety disorder’, given that this is a govern-
      mental discourse, not an existential or experiential one. And yet the capacity of diagnos-
      tic governance to fully control any discourse is never absolute (least of all in psychiatry),
      and there are reasons to assume that the vernacular, philosophical and expert languages
      of ‘anxiety’ bleed into each other in various ways, as we will explore. That said, for pur-
      poses of clarity, this paper will use ‘anxiety disorder’ to refer to a diagnostic classifica-
      tion, and to ‘anxiety’ to refer to a range of subjective, ethical and affective experiences,
      that may (but may not) lead to a diagnosis of an ‘anxiety disorder’.
        As a step towards a sociology of contemporary anxiety, this paper aims to do two
      things. Firstly, it considers how and why ‘anxiety’ (of various forms) became initially

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         5      
                                                             
       occluded under neoliberalism, both within the dominant tradition of American psychia-
       try and within critical, cultural and social theory. Indeed, there is a type of dialectic
       between these parallel discursive spheres, whereby critics may seek to interpret the injus-
       tices and exploitation of a mode of capitalism in terms of the distress that it apparently
       generates. Rising expert and cultural attention to depression over the 1980s and ’90s also
       reflected on the types of ‘critical capacities’ that were available (Boltanski and Thevenot,
       1999), while comparative inattention to anxiety informed how the critique of neoliberal-
       ism initially developed. In the 21st century, anxiety has, however, become a far more
       visible and prevalent type of distress (in the form of numerous ‘disorders’), offering a
       different set of resources to individuals seeking to explain their distress, but also to criti-
       cal social theorists of neoliberalism.                
        Secondly, the paper seeks to locate this resurgence of anxiety within the sociological
       context now known as the ‘asset economy’ (Adkins et al., 2020). ‘Asset-based lives’ are
       governed by a speculative logic, whereby individuals must exploit whatever contingent
       circumstances are available to them (especially those provided by family), in order to
       project themselves onto ontologically uncertain futures. This precarious existence is one
       that has much in common with the mode of freedom described by existentialists, in
       which individual self-hood lacks any kind of essence or transcendence and is wholly
       constituted by decision-making and temporality. There are reasons why the asset econ-
       omy is especially anxiety-provoking. One problem for us to consider is how this sense of
       existential unease relates to the stark rise of ‘anxiety disorders’.
        The paper is structured as follows. The next section examines how and why sociologi-
       cal perspectives have been applied to medicalized and individualized forms of distress in
       the past, and how these went into retreat after the 1970s. That retreat was itself tied up
       with the ascendency of ‘depression’ and – initially – the decline of ‘anxiety’ as psychiat-
       ric concerns. I then examine anxiety from psychoanalytic and existential perspectives,
       emphasizing how anxiety reflects on the groundlessness and temporality of being human.
       The third section identifies key steps via which anxiety became medicalized, what is
       retained and what is discarded as psychoanalytic and philosophical concepts of ‘anxiety’
       morph into the diagnostic category of ‘anxiety disorder’. Finally, we turn to the socio-
       logical context of the asset economy. The argument is made that there are certain family
       resemblances between the ‘post-foundational’ subjectivity of asset-based life (built
       around the logic of balance sheets) and the anxious self, and that diagnoses are in part a
       form of defence against this radically uncertain condition (Menzies, 1960; Armstrong
       and Rustin, 2019).                                    
       Sociologies of Distress                               
       The hope that the roots of mental distress could be located in society and institutions (as
       opposed to individuals) took various forms over the 20th century. The Frankfurt School
       drew on Freud to help explain the absence of a revolutionary class subject and the appeal
       of fascism (Fromm, 1995; Adorno, 2019). London’s Tavistock Clinic and Tavistock
       Institute of Human Relations each in different ways sought to build bridges between
       psychoanalysis and the study of social life (e.g. Jaques, 2001). American humanist psy-
       chology of the 1960s sought to move beyond normalizing patients, and to examine the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      conditions of general human flourishing (Grogan, 2013). Simultaneously, anti-psychia-
      trists highlighted the politics of how ‘sanity’ and ‘insanity’ are distinguished, and the
      often violent methods used to treat the latter (Foucault, 2001; Laing, 2010). This is a
      heterogenous list of theoretical and methodological traditions, but what they all shared
      was a commitment to binding an analysis of psychological distress to political and eco-
      nomic critique.                                        
        As copious histories of psychiatry and psychology have detailed, these diverse tradi-
      tions have shrunk significantly since the dawn of the neoliberal era, which has coincided
      with the widespread medicalization of mental distress (Healy, 1997; Rose, 2013).
      Behaviourist, cognitivist and neurochemical explanations for human suffering have gen-
      erated a range of professional treatments, operating via psychopharmaceuticals and/or
      short-term therapeutic interventions in the cognition and behaviour of sufferers (Lawlor,
      2012; Moloney, 2013). A key way in which these treatments align with wider currents of
      neoliberalism (and differ from the various forms of critical social psychology that came
      before) is that they view distress as a dysfunction within the individual, rather than as
      possibly truthful reflections of material, political and social circumstances (Sampson,
      1981). This ideological climate has allowed techniques of treatment and optimization
      (such as mindfulness and coaching) to migrate constantly between the realms of psychia-
      try, self-help, management and education, to form a generalized infrastructure of quanti-
      fication and modification of individuals (Binkley, 2014).
        Depression has taken on a particular significance in this genealogy of expertise and
      subjectivity, for a number of reasons. Firstly, depression (or melancholia) was one of the
      terrains in which the professional conflict between psychoanalysts and medical psychia-
      trists was most fiercely fought during the 1970s (Wilson, 1993; Lawlor, 2012; Decker,
      2013). The former worked with the assumption that ‘melancholia’ was caused by conflict
      within the self, resulting from unprocessed grief for a lost love-object (Freud, 2005),
      whereas the latter assumed that ‘depression’ was caused by an imbalance in neurochem-
      istry. Debates about depression touched on the very ontology of the self, and who has the
      authority to treat it; the triumph of the positivist viewpoint on depression was also the
      triumph of psychological positivism more broadly. Secondly, the problem of happiness
      (and its inverse) was elevated to a new cultural and political significance by the individu-
      alism and consumerism of the 1960s. An ethos in which the individual was exhorted to
      achieve satisfaction, self-esteem and flourishing (as opposed to discipline and normali-
      zation) further pathologized the individual who was unable to do so (Smail, 1999;
      Ehrenberg, 2010).                                      
        Thirdly, as critics of the DSM-III (1980) have emphasized, the new diagnostic
      approach was incapable of distinguishing a symptom from a disorder; it merely offered
      a standardized tool with which to name symptoms, but offered no explanation for them,
      beyond the assumption that it lay in brain chemistry (Healy, 1997; Horwitz and Wakefield,
      2007). To suffer a psychological ‘disorder’ or ‘disease’ simply meant to present a suffi-
      cient list of symptoms from a given list, for a sufficient length of time. On this basis, the
      only way of identifying that a disease was present (as opposed to merely a group of
      symptoms) was that the symptoms were alleviated by a drug that professed to treat that
      disease. The success and cultural profile of Prozac, marketed as an ‘anti-depressive’,
      granted credibility to the neurochemical theory of depression, while also greatly

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         7      
                                                             
       expanding the definitional and explanatory reach of ‘depression’ as a concept, as it
       became clear how many other syndromes and malaises could be alleviated with SSRIs.
        ‘Depression’ became an umbrella category, whose lack of specificity was mirrored in
       the breadth of symptoms to which ‘anti-depressants’ could be targeted (Ehrenberg,
       2010). But depression and anti-depressants also took on a wider significance for cultural
       theorists and critics of neoliberalism, who hoped to find in them a glimmer of the nega-
       tivity from which critique and even resistance might emerge (Fisher, 2009; Davies,
       2011). It was argued that ‘the new economy of the 1990s was essentially a Prozac econ-
       omy’ (Berardi, 2011: 36). Statistical rates of depression (in the diagnostic sense) became
       widely used to criticize the injustices and iniquities of neoliberal capitalism, and the
       inequality and precarity it breeds (Wilkinson and Pickett, 2009; Stuckler and Basu,
       2013). These critical perspectives have all been valuable as ways of resurrecting a pos-
       sible alliance of critical psychology and political economy, but they leave the hegemonic
       status of ‘depression’ relatively untroubled. A preoccupation with the ‘positive’ and ‘neg-
       ative’ affects generated by contemporary capitalism potentially obscures other psychic
       phenomena, such as anxiety, that potentially cast a different light on political economy.
        Elements of anti-psychiatry have continued to inspire clinical psychologists (e.g.
       Bentall, 2009), while a tradition of ‘critical psychology’ survived as a rear-guard action
       against behaviourist, cognitivist and medicalised accounts of ‘mental illness’ (Smail,
       1999; Rapley et al., 2011). Social epidemiology has successfully demonstrated statistical
       correlations between rates of mental illness and economic circumstance (e.g. Muntaner,
       2004), but there remains a role for sociology and the ‘sociological imagination’ in helping
       to interpret how and why distress manifests as it does, where and when it does.
        Historical and cultural critiques, which have sought to locate the rise of depression in
       the context of post-1960s individualism and neoliberalism, have pointed to the sorts of
       sociological narratives and explanations that can assist with such a hermeneutical pro-
       ject. The task is not to move from statistical correlation to causation, but to weave
       explanatory narratives on the basis of those correlations, in tandem with sociological
       accounts of structural change. The depressed self of the 1970s and ’80s has been inter-
       preted against the backdrop of post-1960s neoliberal developments with which it coin-
       cided: consumerism and post-Fordist working practices. The startling rise of the anxious
       self in the 21st century (especially post-2008 and amongst young people) demands a
       similar hermeneutic response, which has rarely occurred.1 But first, we must consider
       how anxiety was first occluded, then reappeared, as a psychic phenomenon.
       Anxiety as Neurosis and as Mood                       
       Common to virtually any definition of ‘anxiety’ is a sense of dread or worry that either
       lacks any discernible object (and is therefore not ‘about’ anything in particular) or else
       seems disproportionate to whatever its proximate cause happens to be. This section of
       the paper seeks to identify key aspects of anxiety as they have appeared to both existen-
       tialist and psychoanalytic thinkers, which arguably hold important clues for sociology.
       Anxiety, from these non-medicalized perspectives, is not a ‘disorder’ and – while poten-
       tially unpleasant – should not be considered ‘unhealthy’, but instead registers as a central
       fact of being a human with a degree of freedom in the world.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
        Within the Freudian tradition, anxiety originally indicated forms of intra-psychic con-
      flict (i.e. neurosis) and repressed libidinal energy that was manifest via irrational fears,
      dread and panic attacks (Rickels and Rynn, 2001; Horwitz, 2013; Crocq, 2017). In his
      earlier work, Freud took a more physiological perspective, in which the repression of
      sexual urges was the cause of anxiety, suggesting that anxiety was an effect more than a
      cause (Freud, 1985 [1894]). But anxiety would later take on a more generative and pri-
      mordial function. Especially after the First World War, Freud came to view anxiety as the
      force that produced neuroses and psychoses. On this basis, anxiety would become a kind
      of master concept for analysts and the Freudian tradition, including the work of Adolf
      Meyer that shaped the post-war American psychiatric profession. In both the DSM-I
      (1952) and the DSM-II (1968), anxiety was more than a mere diagnostic category, but
      retained a privileged theoretical place in the understanding and explanation of other
      symptoms (Rickels and Rynn, 2001). No clinical distinction was drawn at this stage
      between chronic or ‘generalized’ anxiety and anxiety ‘attacks’, seeing as the underlying
      cause was assumed to be the same.                      
        This was echoed at the level of popular and intellectual culture during the middle
      decades of the 20th century in Europe and the United States, when ‘anxiety’ became
      treated as a generalized cultural-psychic malaise, as reflected in the post-war popularity
      of existentialist ideas and literature (Barrett, 2011). Works such as Jean-Paul Sartre’s
      Nausea (1938) and W.H. Auden’s The Age of Anxiety (1948) explored how everyday
      urban life was punctured by feelings of deep pointlessness and disorientation. Reflections
      on the ‘human condition’ and the fate of ‘man’ in a godless universe produced a dis-
      course of philosophical anthropology that grappled with the collapse of moral yardsticks
      and traditions, which appeared to have been demolished by the horrors of the first half of
      the 20th century (Greif, 2016). The comforts of the emerging consumer culture of the
      1950s, coupled with recent memories of devastation, could be seen as fertile conditions
      for a sense of dread which struggles to attach itself to any discernible threat. It is because
      anxiety (unlike fear) is provoked by no empirical threat that existentialists have seen it as
      emanating from something ontological. Such moods and emotions have a privileged
      position within the existentialist tradition, seeing as they bring to light elements of exist-
      ence that cannot be grasped cognitively, and do so in part via the body (Heidegger, 1962;
      Sartre, 2015).                                         
        Nowhere was the philosophical status of anxiety more important than in Heidegger’s
      philosophy of human Being. What anxiety reveals here is the fundamental temporality of
      being human, the existential fact that a human life is a constant process of becoming,
      only achieving completion in death (Heidegger, 1962: 232). Anxiety is for Heidegger
      ‘primordial’, not some effect of empirical circumstances, but how humans first encoun-
      ter their ontological relationship to the world (1962: 310). That relationship is a temporal
      one, lacking any stable foundations or essence, and it is this very lack that anxiety (which
      notably lacks an object) makes palpable, in the form of ‘mood’. The human being is
      always ‘ahead of itself’, that is, in a state of anticipation, because it is always in a state
      of ‘care’ towards that which has yet to transpire (1962: 297). But it also finds itself
      ‘thrown’ into a set of circumstances that are now in the past, a ‘having been’, including
      the fact of a birth that was never willed. These basic realities of being a human, with a
      contingent past, an undetermined future, and finally a death, are things which are hidden

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         9      
                                                             
       by everyday discourse and reason, but which anxiety has a unique capacity to ‘bring us
       back’ to. As Peter Osborne has noted, the future holds ontological priority over the past
       in this scheme, and it is death (as opposed to birth) that the human being is tasked with
       taking ownership over (Osborne, 2020).                
        Heidegger’s account signals a central commonality between psychoanalytic and exis-
       tentialist perspectives on anxiety, namely the emphasis on time, and futurity in particular.
       Amongst the forms of neurotic anxiety that concerned Freud was ‘anticipatory anxiety’,
       a feeling of non-specific dread regarding that which was yet to unfold. For Freud, the ego
       is tasked with enacting defences against external dangers, but can also do the same
       against internal processes that are anticipated to cause it pain and displeasure (Nersessian,
       2013). In both cases, the self must be constantly ahead of itself, which can in extreme
       cases become a neurotic, over-defensive relationship to the future. For Heidegger, anx-
       ious anticipation is a reminder that we are temporal beings. Society and community offer
       various ways of hiding this truth (such as institutional rituals, which imply permanence),
       creating sources of existential security and identity that rescue the individual from anxi-
       ety. Institutional rituals serve as what Tavistock researchers have termed ‘social defences
       against anxiety’, allowing individuals to go about their daily lives without having to
       confront the full uncertainty or stakes of what they are doing (Menzies, 1960; Armstrong
       and Rustin, 2019). Early experiences may play a particularly important role in building
       what Laing termed ‘ontological security’ for the individual, without which the ‘person is
       preoccupied with preserving rather than gratifying himself: the ordinary circumstances
       of living threaten his low threshold of security’ (Laing, 2010: 42). In acute cases, this
       presents as a schizoid or ‘divided’ self which refuses to confront the reality of an outside
       world. But even from this critical perspective, anxiety retains a capacity to reveal, inas-
       much as angst serves as an index of the precarity of conventions and social roles that are
       available. Isolation and ennui reflect sociological and psychological truths about the
       weakening of sources of existential security, that is, the social defences against anxiety
       (Giddens, 2013). Whether viewed as neurosis, psychosis, as ontological revelation or as
       an effect of modernity, anxiety must be allowed to speak, and when it does so it reflects
       on relations to the indeterminacy of the future. That in turn is a reflection on sociological
       conditions, including the security provided by economic relations.
       Anxiety as Disorder                                   
       The rise of medicalized or neo-Kraepelinian psychiatry in the United States in the 1970s,
       which produced the DSM-III in 1980, is a story that has been told repeatedly and exten-
       sively (Wilson, 1993; Shorter, 1997; Decker, 2013). To the extent that this was a revolu-
       tion aimed at overthrowing psychoanalytic orthodoxy, it also necessarily had to topple
       ‘anxiety’ from its privileged position in the explanation of distress, or what would
       become conceived as ‘mental illness’. The DSM-III introduced several new diagnostic
       categories, which separated off aspects of what had once been a master category. Firstly,
       it introduced the category of ‘Generalized Anxiety Disorder’ (GAD), a term that had
       been circulating in US psychiatry since the 1960s, on account of the fact that it seemed
       treatable via different techniques from other more specific phobias. Symptoms of GAD,
       which were primarily psychic and non-specific, needed to be present for six months for
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      a diagnosis to be made, but the difficulty in specifying what the symptoms actually were,
      and the very high levels of co-morbidity with depression, meant that there were lengthy
      debates as to whether it deserved a place in the DSM at all (Crocq, 2017). Secondly, it
      introduced the concept of ‘Panic Disorder’, in which the sufferer experiences persistent
      and crippling anxiety attacks. What had previously been considered one way in which
      anxiety revealed itself was now a separate syndrome of its own. Thirdly, anxiety that
      primarily presented itself in somatic terms was now classified as a ‘Somatization
      Disorder’, thereby undermining the essentially psychosomatic nature of anxiety. And
      fourthly, anxiety that was prompted by specific situations was broken down into separate
      ‘phobias’, such as ‘Social Phobia’, in which sufferers experience excessive fear of being
      judged by others (Moutier, 1998).                      
        In this way, the concept of anxiety as it had been passed down through the psychoana-
      lytic tradition was broken up into component cognitive and behavioural symptoms and
      largely renamed. Where the term ‘anxiety’ did survive, notably in the form of GAD, this
      was largely as a residual form of distress that didn’t appear to fit other categories, primar-
      ily because it wasn’t intense enough to be somatic or disabling, and wasn’t initially viewed
      as treatable with anti-depressants (Tyrer, 1984). Had GAD been eliminated from the
      DSM, then American psychiatry would have successfully replaced the entire language of
      ‘anxiety’ with specific forms of phobia, somatization and panic, cleansing itself of its
      psychoanalytic heritage in the process. A concept that apparently reflected on the human
      condition itself would have been banished, under the auspices of scientific psychiatry.
        At the same time, the category of ‘depression’ was expanding in various directions,
      primarily because of the growing range of symptoms that could be alleviated with the use
      of ‘anti-depressants’. The logic of the DSM is that, where multiple disorders appear to be
      present, a diagnosis is given to the one that appears most severe or generates the most
      distress. The frequent co-morbidity of depression and anxiety (which now runs at over
      50%), and the greater suitability of depression to classification by the DSM-III, meant that
      depression effectively trumped anxiety in the hierarchy of disorders, and many patients
      who might once have been treated for ‘anxious neurosis’ were instead treated for ‘depres-
      sion’ (Horwitz, 2013; Hirschfeld, 2023). The fact that the new SSRIs were marketed as
      ‘anti-depressants’, despite the wide range of syndromes that they helped to relieve (includ-
      ing anxiety), accelerated this tendency. The triumph of neurochemical over psychoana-
      lytic theoretical frameworks in American psychiatry could therefore be witnessed in part
      via the steady encroachment of ‘depression’ into territories formally designated as ‘anxi-
      ety’. By the turn of the 21st century, US psychiatrists were more than twice as likely to
      make a diagnosis of ‘depression’ as of ‘anxiety’ (Horwitz and Wakefield, 2012: 204).
        The fact that the language of ‘anxiety’ was not successfully expunged by medicalization
      of distress potentially signals the limits of that medicalization project. While ‘anxiety’
      retained some kind of residual place in the DSM-III, denoting symptoms that couldn’t be
      captured as ‘depression’, ‘somatization’, ‘phobia’ or ‘panic’, GAD received greater defini-
      tion in the DSM-IV (1994), now framed in terms of persistent and excessive ‘worry’, that
      was accompanied by other behavioural and cognitive symptoms such as sleep disturbance
      and irritability (Murphy and Leighton, 2009). By continuing to restrict this to the realm of
      the psychic and the non-specific (as opposed to somatic syndromes, phobias and panics),
      this remained a relatively narrow category, that could be encroached upon further by

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         11     
                                                             
       ‘depression’, but did attain clearer clinical definition. ‘Worry’ was in turn understood as
       ‘apprehensive expectation’, a reminder of the futural quality of what had once been named
       ‘anxious neurosis’. Meanwhile, ‘social phobia’ was renamed ‘social anxiety’, becoming
       more clearly denoted to emphasize its persistent and excessive quality. The DSM-V (2013)
       later added ‘separation anxiety disorder’, to refer to those who are persistently unable to
       leave home, go to school or the like. To be sure, it is assumed within the post-DSM III,
       neo-Kraepelinian paradigm that all of these ‘disorders’ have genetic and neurochemical
       underpinnings (Wiedemann, 2015; Szuhany and Simon, 2022).
        The clinical reappraisal of anxiety over the 1990s and 2000s created the conditions for
       a remarkable resurgence in rates of diagnosis. Having first been largely expunged from
       the vocabulary of psychiatry, and then recast in terms of behavioural and cognitive
       symptoms, awareness of ‘anxiety’ began to rise all over again, to the levels with which
       this paper began. The high co-morbidity of anxiety disorders with depression (which the
       DSM-III and the launch of SSRIs meant was too often reduced to just depression) could
       equally be viewed from the other perspective: people may suffer from persistently low
       moods because they suffer from such acute anxiety. In many circumstances, anxiety
       deserved a higher place in the diagnostic hierarchy than depression. In view of very high
       rates of co-morbidity, a diagnostic category of ‘Mixed Anxiety Depressive Disorder’
       (MADD) was added to the tenth edition of International Statistical Classification of
       Diseases and Related Health Problems. Even so, the explanatory limitations of the neo-
       Kraepelinian diagnostic model are as severe in the case of ‘anxiety’ as they are of
       ‘depression’. In neither case does a standardized taxonomy of symptoms and nomencla-
       ture help to understand what a condition means or what might ultimately explain it.
       Anticipation in the Asset Economy                     
       Even if we do not credit positivist psychiatry with a realistic or theoretically valid account
       of the self, the statistics on the rise of anxiety in the 21st century provide a clue regarding
       contemporary subjectivity and its discontents, just as the elevated professional discourses
       surrounding ‘depression’ signalled something about cultural and economic transformations
       from the 1960s through to the 1980s. These statistics show a sharp rise in rates of ‘anxiety
       disorder’ after 2008, concentrated especially amongst young people, with scarcely any
       increase amongst over-50s (Goodwin et al., 2020; Slee et al., 2021). Hacking famously
       suggested that labels (such as psychiatric diagnoses) that are applied to people have ‘loop-
       ing effects’, whereby individuals come to experience, explain and narrate their distress via
       the expert discourses that surround them (Hacking, 1996, 2004). This has been observed in
       how young people discuss their psychological distress (Lindholm and Wickström, 2020)
       and is exacerbated by the internet, which allows sufferers to diagnose their own symptoms.
       We might therefore surmise there is a ‘loop’ connecting ‘anxiety’ (as ontological condition
       and subjective experience) and ‘anxiety disorder’ (as diagnostic category), in which the
       condition of being anxious finds some public expression and recognition in medical symp-
       toms of anxiety disorders. Diagnostic discourses and categories can be viewed as providing
       what Boltanski and Thevenot term a ‘critical capacity’ that is available to sufferers as much
       as to clinicians, in justifying and explaining certain courses of action (Boltanski and
       Thevenot, 1999). In other words, the language of anxiety disorders and symptoms enters
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      the self-understanding and narratives of the anxious subject, as they navigate institutions
      (such as workplace or university) that may be contributing to the experience of anxiety.
        Where anxiety is concerned, the search for diagnosis may itself be considered a quest
      for ‘existential security’, that is, a means of alleviating uncertainty regarding one’s own
      self or Being, and its relationship to an insecure future. Where the individual is inade-
      quately grounded in social institutions, a diagnostic classification provides an anchor of
      sorts. Thus, a label of ‘anxiety disorder’ provides one kind of ‘social defence against
      anxiety’, serving to keep wider psychoanalytic and existential questions at bay, and
      anchoring the individual in a set of norms, metrics and institutional rituals with respect
      to ‘mental health’ and ‘wellbeing’. ‘Anxiety disorders’ remain related to anxiety in a
      more primordial sense, reflecting heavily on the disintegration of institutional rituals and
      other sources of existential security, even while the medicalized language of ‘disorder’
      might distract from these underlying social facts.     
        As we have established, something common to any understanding of anxiety is a
      concern with the future that can become debilitating (or, for Heidegger, revelatory).
      Moving from a diagnostics to a sociology of anxiety requires us to consider why this
      concern may have become unbearable for so many people, especially young people, in
      the 21st century. There is no shortage of possible reasons, and the most obvious one –
      global warming – has attracted its own deserved share of analysis as a driver of anxiety,
      especially amongst young people (Grose, 2020; Marks et al., 2021). But here I wish to
      examine another sociological dimension of the present, that has been encapsulated in
      literature on the ‘asset economy’ and ‘assetization’, and which has cast fresh light on the
      management and politics of temporality and the future in neoliberal societies (Doganova
      and Muniesa, 2015; Adkins et al., 2020; Birch and Muniesa, 2020). The logic of the
      asset, which is ultimately the logic of the financial balance sheet, generates a form of
      selfhood which is in a constant state of anticipation regarding what is about to unfold;
      indeed the very function of balance sheets in financialized societies is to enable decision-
      makers to act within and upon a future that has yet to transpire, while taking into account
      the facts of a contingent past (Beckert, 2016). Economic existence appears without any
      underlying foundation or measure of ‘value’, but as a constant flow of time (Konings and
      Adkins, 2022) into which one has been thrown (Davies, 2024). Rationalities that have
      previously been viewed as foundational to neoliberalism, such as consumerism, produc-
      tivity and ‘growth’, are displaced by an emphasis on speculation and anticipation. This
      aspect change also affects the kinds of pathologies and distress that capitalism might be
      expected to generate.                                  
        ‘Assets’ are those items that get accounted for on the basis that they are expected to
      pay some calculable return in the future, sitting on the other side of the balance sheet to
      ‘liabilities’, which are obligations to pay. Thus housing can be viewed as an ‘asset’ to the
      extent that it is a source of future rents and capital gains, but it also may involve ‘liabili-
      ties’ in the form of mortgage debt. Unlike the category of ‘capital’ (whose traditional
      usage implies a relationship to production), ‘assets’ are entities whose value consists
      wholly in financial calculations of their future benefits, regardless of how they came to
      be (Doganova, 2024), and ‘asset managers’ typically own a wide array of ‘real’ and
      financial entities in search of profitability (Christophers, 2023). Where political econo-
      mists in the past have criticized capitalism by focusing on the ‘commodity form’ (that

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         13     
                                                             
       which is produced in order to be exchanged for money on the market), the period since
       the GFC has seen rising attention to the ‘asset form’, along with renewed concern with
       forms of wealth accumulation (or rent-seeking) that bypass the sphere of production and
       labour altogether (Piketty, 2014; Pistor, 2019; Christophers, 2020). The thesis that neo-
       liberalism brings about an ‘asset economy’ rests on the claim that its central organizing
       principle is not the extraction of value from labour, but the manipulation of time via bal-
       ance sheets (Konings, 2018). This insight derives from Minsky, for whom every actor in
       a capitalist economy is fundamentally a ‘balance sheet actor’ (like a bank), whose main
       concern is to manage their assets and liabilities in such a way that they have sufficient
       liquidity to survive into the future (Minsky, 2008; Konings and Adkins, 2022). An exis-
       tential threat lurks in every balance sheet: the income generated by one’s assets must be
       enough to pay one’s liabilities, or else the entity is extinguished. This is a weak basis for
       the ontological security that wards off anxiety.      
        Foucault made the acute observation that American neoliberal thought, as expressed
       in the work of Gary Becker, set about eliminating the category of ‘labour’ from econom-
       ics, by reconceiving human beings as forms of ‘capital’ that can be invested in for some
       future return, via education, training or self-improvement (Foucault, 2008). As ‘balance
       sheet entities’, individuals have no essence or essential purpose, but are – as with
       Heidegger – thrown into a set of contingent circumstances and commitments, and face
       an open-ended future. This is a departure from the liberal Enlightenment tradition, in
       which ideas of ‘life’ and ‘labour’ had served as regulatory (or quasi-transcendent) prin-
       ciples of political economy and, by implication, of history (Foucault, 2005). Instead, life
       becomes a fundamentally speculative process, a series of bets and strategies, that may or
       may not pay off. Freedom must therefore be seized in a quasi-existentialist sense, with-
       out any guidance or measure through which to judge value, beyond what Minsky termed
       the ‘survival constraint’ (a nakedly existential phrase) that one must remain solvent, from
       one moment to the next.                               
        The most palpable manifestation of the ‘asset economy’ has been the reappearance of
       the multi-generational family, as a means through which individuals seek to navigate an
       uncertain future and (for the middle classes) to share in the gains of asset appreciation in
       the housing market (Cooper, 2017; Adkins et al., 2019). Gifts, inheritance, mortgage
       guarantees and shared living arrangements between generations are all means of manag-
       ing the family ‘balance sheet’ of assets and liabilities over the course of multiple lifes-
       pans. There is ethnographic evidence that the management of family wealth is the cause
       of grave anxieties, that wealth might depreciate or be misused further down the family
       line (Sherman, 2019; Higgins, 2021). The contingency of wealth, debt and social bonds
       into which an individual is born shape what kinds of freedom and possibility are availa-
       ble to them, and how different stages of the life-course (childhood, independence, retire-
       ment) play out. These are what Adkins et al. (2020) refer to as ‘asset-based lives’,
       anchored in ‘Minskyan households’.                    
        Alternatively, consider how reputation becomes a type of asset to be speculatively
       invested in for future returns, in the context of social media platforms and rating systems
       (Rosamond, 2020). By rendering past behaviour visible and rateable, platforms encourage
       strategic investments in reputational capital, of a sort that might generate financial (or
       other) returns in the future. Thus liberal struggles for ‘recognition’ (that coincided with the

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      emergence of the commodity form as the organizing principle of capitalism) morph into
      neoliberal struggles for ‘reputation’ (which coincides with the emergence of the asset econ-
      omy) (Davies, 2021). Unpaid work and ‘networking’ take on the characteristics of financial
      investment, where one’s name or ‘brand’ must be strategically built up over time. But this
      is also a precariously post-foundational source of identity and value. Reputations can rap-
      idly turn negative, producing a culture and ethos of paranoia as to what has been captured,
      what has been seen, and what forms of social divestment might follow.
        Historically, the emergence of this asset condition can be traced with some specificity
      to key moments in the development of neoliberal reform. The fierce deflationary policies
      of the early 1980s in the Anglosphere signalled a new state commitment to bring down
      inflation through the defeat of organized labour and the normalization of higher unem-
      ployment, but asset values were implicitly protected from this politically manufactured
      depression (Cooper, 2024). The status of housing as not just a commodity (produced to
      be sold) but an asset (owned in pursuit of returns and capital gain) is significant here, and
      was bolstered by policies that reduced the rights of tenants and which excluded house
      prices from the calculation of inflation (O’Mahony, 2007; Konings, 2018). These were
      the building blocks of a political economy that made social, productive and reproductive
      life subservient to the temporal sovereignty of the financial balance sheet.
        But the GFC was a turning point inasmuch as it rendered this privileging of asset
      ownership naked, stripping away whatever conservative and liberal ideologies might
      previously have justified neoliberal reforms (Davies, 2024). The public policies enacted
      across the Global North in response to the GFC, both immediately and in the years that
      followed, made it very clear that supporting the interests of asset owners – through bail-
      outs, ultra-low interest rates and central bank asset purchases – trumped all other possi-
      ble political-economic goals. Thus there followed a decade of so-called ‘K-shaped’
      growth, in which the price of assets (leveraged by ultra-cheap credit) rose inexorably,
      while wage and productivity growth stagnated. This was the historical context in which
      the scholarly reappraisal of wealth, capital, inequality and assets took place (Savage,
      2021). The question of future appreciation and depreciation of assets – housing and
      ‘human capital’ especially – became unavoidable after 2008, providing the sociological
      backdrop to a surge of anxiety disorders amongst the young.
        As many critics have noted, in addition to amplifying the influence of the family, polit-
      ical commitment to indefinite asset appreciation has had some pronounced generational
      effects, which fall especially hard upon the young (Milburn, 2019; Forrest and Xian,
      2018; Timperley, 2020). Whether one has the opportunity to acquire the attributes of eco-
      nomic and social independence, such as home ownership, family and financial security,
      depends heavily on the sheer existential luck as to when one happened to be born and/or
      the balance sheet of one’s parents. This state of (what Heidegger terms) ‘thrownness’
      shapes what kinds of futures the self is projected onto, via various speculative projects and
      strategies. The ‘assetization’ of higher education (in which a degree becomes explicitly
      represented as a leveraged investment, whose success will only be revealed over decades)
      requires the anticipatory self to be stretched from childhood through to middle age.
      Distinctions between childhood and adulthood become harder to establish, where young
      adults are dependent on their parents either for financial gifts or accommodation. Concepts
      of ‘career’ or the ‘life course’ which once provided meaning and coherence to individual
      biographies break down, where work is no longer an adequate basis for security and

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         15     
                                                             
       individual progression. What is potentially so overwhelming about asset-based life is that
       it knows no bounds, extending well beyond the labour market or workplace to engulf fam-
       ily life, intimate relationships (Feher, 2009), social life and relationship to self. The logic
       of the balance sheet can encompass monetary and non-monetary ‘investments’ and
       ‘debts’, while in the space between past and future the central constraint is (as Minsky
       emphasized) ‘survival’. Save for the very wealthy, work remains a necessity for achieving
       this survival, but work’s status as a source of ontological security (that is, of secure iden-
       tity over time) is greatly reduced (Sennett, 1998; Standing, 2011).
        The relationship of these conditions to the dramatic surge of ‘anxiety disorders’ is
       certainly not a direct one, but may instead be mediated by the financial and diagnostic
       governmentalities that make up 21st century subjectivity, especially that of the young.
       The requirement to define oneself in relation to an uncertain future (for example through
       investment in one’s human capital), without the ontological security provided by con-
       cepts of ‘career’ and stable metrics of ‘value’, is existentially burdensome. The language
       of ‘anxiety disorder’, which is an artefact of medicalized psychiatry, provides its own
       source of ontological security, plus a narrative surrounding the state of overwhelming
       futurity that is a consequence of economic conditions as much as psychic ones.
       Anticipatory selfhood is the thread linking ‘asset-based lives’ to ‘anxiety’ (as existential
       condition), and from there to ‘anxiety disorder’ (as diagnosis).
       Conclusion                                            
       In his critical appraisal of contemporary psychiatry, Rose has argued in favour of a shift
       from ‘diagnosis’ to ‘formulation’, ‘an account that seeks to make sense of a person’s cur-
       rent difficulties in terms of aspects of their current situation, for example, their relation-
       ships, their experiences at work or in unemployment, their housing and financial
       situation, and indeed their own ways of making sense of their situation, and accounting
       for their distress’ (Rose, 2018: 187). Empirical evidence on the social contexts of ‘anxi-
       ety disorders’ contributes to this kind of ‘formulation’, emphasizing the contribution of
       financial insecurity and precarity. In the UK, those living in private rental accommoda-
       tion are twice as likely to experience an anxiety disorder as homeowners (Clark and
       Wenham, 2022). Universities appear to have become especially conducive to anxiety
       disorders, with full-time students more likely to report them than young people either in
       work or out of work (McCurdy and Murphy, 2024).       
        Neoliberal reforms since the 1980s have unwound many of the institutions that might
       previously have served as sources of ‘existential security’, including trade unions, free
       university tuition, the safety nets of the welfare state and so on. The resulting condition
       is one that has been frequently characterized as one of ‘precarity’, which forces individu-
       als into a condition of self-reliance, or what Streeck sums up as ‘hoping’, ‘coping’, ‘dop-
       ing’ and ‘shopping’ (Streeck, 2017: 46). One injunction that hovers over the precarious
       subject is that they must attempt to remain ‘positive’ and exercise desire, in order to
       accord with systemic imperatives to keep going. But this doesn’t capture a separate
       dimension of neoliberal society, which is the obligation to face up to an economic exist-
       ence that is characterized ontologically by constant temporal flow. The mode of selfhood
       that is valorized is not only a ‘positive’ one (producing depression as its pathological
       correlate) but also a post-foundational or ‘speculative’ one (Komporozos-Athanasiou,
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      2022), in which the present is stretched between a contingent past and an undetermined
      future which the individual must seize control over. The politically installed conditions
      that make up the ‘asset economy’ (which engulfs housing and higher education, amongst
      much else) actively impose a form of existential isolation, not only through deconstruct-
      ing institutional rituals and safety nets, but by rendering time (and not labour or con-
      sumer welfare) as the governing principle of economic life.
        Statistics suggest that we are living through an age of anxiety, though of course there
      have been previous ones. Not just neoliberalism, but modernity itself can be read as a
      generator of anxiety, in the way in which institutions and rituals are constantly destroyed
      and remade (Giddens, 2013). But neoliberalism is a distinctive variant of modernity,
      producing a distinctive mode of anxiety: financial time is installed as the governing prin-
      ciple of society, with the balance sheet the existential template for life itself. The gambit
      of neoliberal governance is that existence must become financial, and finance must
      become existential. The language of ‘human capital’, ‘survival constraint’ or ‘cost of liv-
      ing crisis’ indexes this fusion of the existential and the financial. Therefore, anxiety is not
      merely what is left after other sources of security and solidarity have been stripped away
      (be that by war or capitalism), but manufactured by design, thanks to the enforced insti-
      tutionalization of financial time that is the political backdrop to the ‘asset economy’.
        The statistical evidence on ‘anxiety disorders’ indicates one stark feature of the pre-
      sent age of anxiety, which distinguishes it from previous ones: it is primarily children and
      young people who are afflicted. If we are to move from diagnosis to ‘formulation’ of this
      distress, we need an account that does two things. Firstly, it needs to consider how the
      foundations and structures of the individual life course have been so drastically dis-
      rupted, as to make the future a space of radical uncertainty and threat. We need to con-
      sider how the post-foundational or speculative existence that is integral to contemporary
      neoliberalism is by its very nature an anxiety-producing one. Secondly, we need to ask
      what a diagnosis of ‘anxiety disorder’ reveals and conceals about anxiety. It is partly use-
      ful to the sufferer as a defence against the full extent of anxiety, a kind of narrative that
      anchors the individual in an expert rubric. But in an imperfect way, it is also a means
      through which existential anxiety speaks and shows itself, telling us certain things about
      power and governance in our economy today.             
      ORCID iD                                               
      William Davies https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9506-969X   
      Note                                                   
      1. Interestingly, the domain in which sociologists have recently attended to ‘anxiety’ as a dis-
        tinct phenomenon has been in their own professional sphere, namely of higher education
        (Loveday, 2018, 2021; Haiven and Komporozos-Athanasiou, 2022).
      References                                             
      Adkins, Lisa, Cooper, Melinda and Konings, Martijn (2019) Class in the 21st century: Asset infla-
        tion and the new logic of inequality. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space,
        0308518X1987367.                                     
      Adkins, Lisa, Cooper, Melinda and Konings, Martijn (2020) The Asset Economy. London: Wiley.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         17     
                                                             
       Adorno, Theodor (2019) The Authoritarian Personality. London: Verso Books.
       Armstrong, David and Rustin, Mike (2019) Social Defences Against Anxiety: Explorations in a
         Paradigm. London: Routledge.                        
       Auden, W.H. (1948) The Age of Anxiety. New York, NY: Random House.
       Barrett, William (2011) Irrational Man: A Study in Existential Philosophy. New York, NY: Knopf
         Doubleday.                                          
       Beckert, Jens (2016) Imagined Futures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
       Bentall, Richard (2009) Doctoring the Mind: Why Psychiatric Treatments Fail. London: Penguin.
       Berardi, Franco (2011) After the Future. Chico, CA: AK Press.
       Binkley, Sam (2014) Happiness as Enterprise: An Essay on Neoliberal Life. New York, NY:
         SUNY Press.                                         
       Birch, Kean and Muniesa, Fabian (eds) (2020) Assetization: Turning Things into Assets in
         Technoscientific Capitalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
       Boltanski, Luc and Thevenot, Laurent (1999) The sociology of critical capacity. European Journal
         of Social Theory 2(3): 359–377.                     
       Cederström, Carl and Fleming, Peter (2012) Dead Man Working. New Arlesford: John Hunt
         Publishing.                                         
       Christophers, Brett (2020) Rentier Capitalism: Who Owns the Economy, and Who Pays for It?
         London: Verso Books.                                
       Christophers, Brett (2023) Our Lives in Their Portfolios: Why Asset Managers Own the World.
         London: Verso Books.                                
       Clark, Tom and Wenham, Andrew (2022) Anxiety Nation: Economic Insecurity and Mental
         Distress in 2020s Britain. London: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
       Cooper, Melinda (2017) Family Values: Between Neoliberalism and the New Social Conservatism.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
       Cooper, Melinda (2024) Counterrevolution: Extravagance and Austerity in Public Finance.
         Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.          
       Crocq, Marc-Antoine (2017) The history of Generalized Anxiety Disorder as a diagnostic cat-
         egory. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 19(2): 107–116.
       Davies, William (2011) The political economy of unhappiness. New Left Review 71.
       Davies, William (2021) The politics of recognition in the age of social media. New Left Review
         128: 83–99.                                         
       Davies, William (2024) Owning towards death: The asset condition as existential conundrum.
         Finance & Society 10(3): 215–233.                   
       Decker, Hannah (2013) The Making of DSM-III: A Diagnostic Manual’s Conquest of American
         Psychiatry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.        
       Doganova, Liliana (2024) Discounting the Future: The Ascendancy of a Political Technology.
         Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.          
       Doganova, Liliana and Muniesa, Fabian (2015) Capitalization devices: Business models and
         the renewal of markets. In: Kornberger, Martin, Justesen, Lise, et al. (eds). Making Things
         Valuable. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 109–125.
       Durkheim, Émile (1952) Suicide: A Study in Sociology. Oxford: Routledge.
       Ehrenberg, Alain (2010) The Weariness of the Self: Diagnosing the History of Depression in the
         Contemporary Age. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
       Feher, Michel (2009) Self-appreciation; or, the aspirations of human capital. Public Culture 21(1):
         21–41.                                              
       Fisher, Mark (2009) Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? London: Zero Books.
       Forrest, Ray and Xian, Shi (2018) Accommodating discontent: Youth, conflict and the housing
         question in Hong Kong. Housing Studies 33(1): 1–17. 

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      Foucault, Michel (2001) Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
        Hove: Psychology Press.                              
      Foucault, Michel (2005) The Order of Things. Oxford: Routledge.
      Foucault, Michel (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1978–1979.
        Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.                     
      Freud, Sigmund (1985 [1894]) Draft E: How anxiety originates. In: Masson, Jeffrey (ed.) The
        Complete Letters of Sigmund Freud to Wilhelm Fliess, 1887–1904. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.                                    
      Freud, Sigmund (2005) On Murder, Mourning and Melancholia. London: Penguin Classics.
      Fromm, Eric (1995) The Fear of Freedom. Oxford: Routledge.
      Giddens, Anthony (2013) Modernity and Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age.
        London: John Wiley & Sons.                           
      Goodwin, Renee, Weinberger, Andrea, Kim, June, Wu, Melody and Galea, Sandro (2020)
        Trends in anxiety among adults in the United States, 2008–2018: Rapid increases among
        young adults. Journal of Psychiatric Research 130: 441–446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsy-
        chires.2020.08.014                                   
      Greif, Marc (2016) The Age of the Crisis of Man: Thought and Fiction in America, 1933–1973.
        Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.           
      Grogan, Jessica (2013) Encountering America: Humanistic Psychology, Sixties Culture and the
        Shaping of the Modern Self. New York, NY: Harper Perennial.
      Grose, Anouchka (2020) A Guide to Eco-Anxiety: How to Protect the Planet and Your Mental
        Health. London: Watkins Publishing.                  
      Hacking, Ian (1996) The looping effects of human kinds. In: Sperber, D., Premack, D., and Premack,
        A.J. (eds) Causal Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Debate. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Hacking, Ian (2004) Between Michel Foucault and Erving Goffman: Between discourse in the
        abstract and face-to-face interaction. Economy and Society 33(3): 277–302.
      Haiven, Max and Komporozos-Athanasiou, Aris (2022) An ‘anxiety epidemic’ in the financialized
        university: Critical questions and unexpected resistance. Cultural Politics 18(2): 173–193.
      Healy, David (1997) The Antidepressant Era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Heidegger, Martin (1962) Being and Time. Oxford: Blackwell.
      Higgins, Katie (2021) Dynasties in the making: Family wealth and inheritance for the first-
        generation ultra-wealthy and their wealth managers. The Sociological Review 70(6).
        DOI: 10.1177/00380261211061931.                      
      Hirschfeld, Robert (2023) The comorbidity of major depression and anxiety disorders: Recognition
        and management in primary care. Primary Care Companion to The Journal of Clinical
        Psychiatry 3(6): 244–254.                            
      Horwitz, Allan (2013) Anxiety: A Short History. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
      Horwitz, Allan and Wakefield, Jerome (2007) The Loss of Sadness: How Psychiatry Transformed
        Normal Sorrow into Depressive Disorder. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Horwitz, Allan and Wakefield, Jerome (2012) All We Have to Fear: Psychiatry’s Transformation
        of Natural Anxieties into Mental Disorders. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Jaques, Elliot (2001) The Changing Culture of a Factory. Hove: Psychology Press.
      Kierkegaard, Soren (2014) The Concept of Anxiety: A Simple Psychologically Oriented
        Deliberation in View of the Dogmatic Problem of Hereditary Sin. New York, NY: Norton
      Komporozos-Athanasiou, Aris (2022) Speculative Communities: Living with Uncertainty in a
        Financialized World. Chicago, Il: University of Chicago Press.
      Konings, Martijn (2018) Capital and Time: For a New Critique of Neoliberal Reason. Stanford,
        CA: Stanford University Press.                       
      Konings, Martijn and Adkins, Lisa (2022) Re-thinking the liquid core of capitalism with Hyman
        Minsky. Theory, Culture & Society 39(5): 43–60.      

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Davies                                         19     
                                                             
       Laing, R.D. (2010) The Divided Self (An Existential Study in Sanity and Madness). London:
         Penguin.                                            
       Lawlor, Clark (2012). From Melancholia to Prozac: A History of Depression. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Lindholm, Sofia and Wickström, Anette (2020) ‘Looping effects’ related to young people’s mental
         health: How young people transform the meaning of psychiatric concepts. Global Studies of
         Childhood 10(1): 26–38.                             
       Loveday, Vik (2018) The neurotic academic: Anxiety, casualisation, and governance in the neolib-
         eralising university. Journal of Cultural Economy 11(2): 154–166.
       Loveday, Vik (2021) ‘Under attack’: Responsibility, crisis and survival anxiety amongst manager-
         academics in UK universities. The Sociological Review 69(5): 903–919.
       Marks, Elizabeth, Hickman, Caroline, Pihkala, Panu, and Clayton, Susan, et al. (2021) Young
         People’s Voices on Climate Anxiety, Government Betrayal and Moral Injury: A Global
         Phenomenon (SSRN Scholarly Paper 3918955). Social Science Research Network.
       McCurdy, Charlie and Murphy, Louise (2024) We’ve Only Just Begun. London: The Health
         Foundation/Resolution Foundation.                   
       Menzies, Isabel (1960) A case-study in the functioning of social systems as a defence against anxiety:
         A report on a study of the nursing service of a general hospital. Human Relations 13(2): 95–121.
       Milburn, Keir (2019) Generation Left. London: John Wiley & Sons.
       Mills, C. Wright (2000) The Sociological Imagination. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Minsky, Hyman (2008) Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. London: McGraw Hill.
       Moloney, Paul (2013) The Therapy Industry: The Irresistible Rise of the Talking Cure, and Why It
         Doesn’t Work. London: Pluto Press.                  
       Moutier, Stein (1998) The history, epidemiology, and differential diagnosis of social anxiety dis-
         order. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 5. Available at: https://www.psychiatrist.com/pdf/the-
         history-epidemiology-and-differential-diagnosis-of-social-anxiety-disorder-pdf/ (accessed
         26 January 2025).                                   
       Muntaner, Carlos (2004) Socioeconomic position and major mental disorders. Epidemiologic
         Reviews 26(1): 53–62. https://doi.org/10.1093/epirev/mxh001
       Murphy, Jane and Leighton, Alexander (2009) Anxiety: Its role in the history of psychiatric epide-
         miology. Psychological Medicine 39(7): 1055–1064.   
       Nersessian, Edward (2013) Psychoanalytic theory of anxiety: Proposals for reconsideration. In:
         Arbiser, Samuel, et al. (eds) On Freud’s ‘Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety’. London: Routledge.
       O’Mahony, Lorna (2007) Conceptualising Home: Theories, Laws and Policies. London:
         Bloomsbury.                                         
       Orr, Jackie (2006) Panic Diaries: A Genealogy of Panic Disorder. Durham, NC: Duke University
         Press.                                              
       Osborne, Peter (2020) The Politics of Time: Modernity and Avant-Garde. London: Verso
       Piketty, Thomas (2014) Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
         Press.                                              
       Pistor, Katherina (2019) The Code of Capital: How the Law Creates Wealth and Inequality.
         Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.          
       Rapley, Mark, Moncrieff, Joanna and Dillon, Jacqui (eds) (2011) De-medicalizing Misery:
         Psychiatry, Psychology and the Human Condition. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
       Rebughini, Paola (2021) A sociology of anxiety: Western modern legacy and the Covid-19 out-
         break. International Sociology 36(4): 554–568.      
       Rickels, Karl and Rynn, Moira (2001) What is Generalized Anxiety Disorder? Journal of Clinical
         Psychiatry 9.                                       
       Rosamond, Emily (2020) From reputation capital to reputation warfare: Online ratings, trolling,
         and the logic of volatility. Theory, Culture & Society 37(2): 105–129.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(5)
                                                             
      Rose, Nikolas (2013) What is diagnosis for? Lecture given at ‘DSM-5 and the Future of
        Psychiatry’, Institute of Psychiatry, 4 June 2013. Available at: https://nikolasrose.com/wp-
        content/uploads/2013/07/Rose-2013-What-is-diagnosis-for-IoP-revised-July-2013.pdf
      Rose, Nikolas (2018) Our Psychiatric Future. London: John Wiley & Sons.
      Sampson, Edward (1981) Cognitive psychology as ideology. American Psychologist 36(7):
        730–743.                                             
      Sartre, Jean-Paul (1949 [1938]) Nausea. New York, NY: Penguin.
      Sartre, Jean-Paul (2015) Sketch for a Theory of the Emotions. Oxford: Routledge.
      Savage, Mike (2021) The Return of Inequality: Social Change and the Weight of the Past.
        Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.             
      Sennett, Richard (1998) The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences of Work in the
        New Capitalism. New York, NY: Norton.                
      Sherman, Rachel (2019) Uneasy Street: The Anxieties of Affluence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.                                    
      Shorter, Edward (1997) A History of Psychiatry: From the Era of the Asylum to the Age of Prozac.
        London: John Wiley & Sons.                           
      Slee, April, Nazareth, Irwin, Freemantle, Nick and Horsfall, Laura (2021) Trends in generalised
        anxiety disorders and symptoms in primary care: UK population-based cohort study. The
        British Journal of Psychiatry 218(3): 158–164.       
      Smail, David (1999) The Origins of Unhappiness: A New Understanding of Personal Distress.
        London: Constable.                                   
      Standing, Guy (2011) The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class. London: Bloomsbury.
      Streeck, Wolfgang (2017) How Will Capitalism End? Essays on a Failing System. London: Verso
      Stuckler, David and Basu, Sanjay (2013) The Body Economic: Why Austerity Kills. New York,
        NY: Basic Books.                                     
      Szuhany, Kristin and Simon, Naomi (2022) Anxiety disorders: A review. JAMA 328(24):
        2431–2445.                                           
      Taylor, Charles (1992) Sources of the Self: The Making of the Modern Identity. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Timperley, Chloe (2020) Generation Rent: Why You Can’t Buy a Home (or Even Rent a Good
        One). London: Canbury Press.                         
      Tyrer, Peter (1984) Classification of anxiety. The British Journal of Psychiatry 144(1): 78–83.
      Wiedemann, Klaus (2015) Anxiety and anxiety disorders. In: Wright, James D. (ed.) International
        Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 2nd edn. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 804–810.
      Wilkinson, Richard and Pickett, Kate (2009) The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost
        Always Do Better. London: Allen Lane.                
      Wilson, Mitchell (1993) DSM-III and the transformation of American psychiatry: A history. The
        American Journal of Psychiatry 150(3): 399–410.      
      World Health Organization (2023) Anxiety disorders. Available at: https://www.who.int/news-
        room/fact-sheets/detail/anxiety-disorders (accessed 28 August 2024).
      William Davies is Professor of Political Economy at Goldsmiths, University of London. His
      books include The Limits of Neoliberalism: Authority, Sovereignty and the Logic of Competition
      (2014), The Happiness Industry: How the Government and Big Business Sold Us Wellbeing (2015)
      and Nervous States: How Feeling Took Over the World (2018).
                                                             