[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Post-Neoliberalism?                   
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                             2021,Vol.38(6)167–190
        Neoliberalism,    the                                
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2021
        Alt-Right  and  the                                  
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
        Intellectual  Dark  Web          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/02632764211036731
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Alan Finlayson                                       
        Universityof EastAnglia                              
        Abstract                                             
        Drawing on research from digital media studies, political theory and rhetoric, this
        article explores online radical conservative and reactionary ‘ideological entrepre-
        neurs’.Itarguesthatonlinemediaareunitingan‘ideologicalfamily’aroundconcepts
        ofnaturalinequalityandhostilitytothosewhodenythem.Placingthisphenomenon
        in context, the article shows how online culture reinvigorates well-established dis-
        courses ofoppositionto bureaucrats, intellectuals andexpertsofall kinds, rejecting
        oneversionof theneoliberalstate andof itspersonnel, a‘newclass’ understoodto
        dominatethroughdiscursive,culturalpowerandimaginedthroughthefiguresofthe
        ‘Social Justice Warrior’ and the ‘Cultural Marxist’. In competing for a share of the
        marketplace of ideas, these ideological entrepreneurs promise insights – the revela-
        tions of the ‘red pill’ – critiquing ‘actually-existing’ neoliberalismyet insisting on the
        ‘rationality’ of governance through markets and promising adherents techniques for
        achieving success as liberated entrepreneurial selves.
        Keywords                                             
        alt-right, conservatism, digital culture, ideologies, neoliberalism, online politics,
        rhetoric                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
        In The New Way of the World, Dardot and Laval explain the rise of
        neoliberalism, partly with reference to ‘ideological entrepreneurs’, the
        writers, academics and intellectuals who used their position, particularly
        their media platform, to ‘struggle head-on against all forms of progres-
        sivism and social reform’ (2013: 132–3). Today, ‘ideological entrepre-
        neurship’ has been profoundly affected by the spread of digital,
        participatory and shareable forms of media. Barriers to entry into the
        ‘marketplaceofideas’havelifted.Subscriptionandpeer-to-peerpayment
        systems enable those lacking institutionalised political or journalistic
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:AlanFinlayson.Email:a.finlayson@uea.ac.uk
        TCSOnlineForum:https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/ 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      168                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      platforms to earn a living as a grassroots political ‘digital evangelist’
      (Schradie, 2019). The most successful within this new ‘marketplace of
      ideas’areideologicalentrepreneursdisseminating(andreshaping)‘popu-
      list’ political ideologies hostile to ‘globalism’, multiculturalism, the cul-
      tural and economic integration of minorities, feminism and gender
      politics.                                              
        This article brings togetherand applies approaches fromdigital media
      studies,politicaltheoryandrhetoricinordertounderstandthisphenom-
      enon better. In the first section I review extant research into ‘radical
      conservative’ (Dahl, 1999) and ‘reactionary’ (Robin, 2018) politics
      online, considering a range of examples from the extremes of white
      nationalism to more mainstream opinion about the failures of liberal
      politics.Inasecondsection,drawingonthetheoryofpoliticalideologies,
      I argue that online media erode distinctions between these kinds of pol-
      itics,whichconvergearoundhostilitytoaparticularconceptualisationof
      ‘liberalism’ understood as the constitutive inability to recognise natural
      limits to equality and to social justice. In the third section I show that
      central to the articulation of this hostility is a concept of the ‘new class’,
      which I place within a longstanding political and critical literature. In a
      fourth section I discuss common online rhetorical tropes which organise
      and articulate this hostility today: the ‘Social Justice Warrior’, ‘Cultural
      Marxist’ and ‘red pill’. In the fifth and final section I argue that this
      critique of ‘actually-existing’ neoliberalism nevertheless insists on the
      ‘rationality’ of neoliberal governance through markets. It interpellates
      adherents as entrepreneurial selves, holding their valuable attention by
      promising them techniques for fully inhabiting a neoliberal ‘system of
      norms and functions’ (Dardot and Laval, 2013: 13).     
        Overall, the article aims to make a number of contributions. It syn-
      thesises findings froma largeand diverse literature, presents anoverview
      and explanation of a wide range of online political ideas and arguments,
      and develops an original interpretation of the relationship between neo-
      liberalism and reactionary politics online.            
      Right Online                                           
      The volume of online communication, the speed of turnover and the
      difficulties of interpreting political ideas communicated in various com-
      binations and styles of words and images makes for a bewildering, over-
      grown,ecology.Creatingacomprehensivetaxonomyofspeciesisnoeasy
      task when the analyst of conservative, right and far-right politics is
      confronted by such a range of potential categories as ‘nationalists, iden-
      titarians, libertarians, neoconservatives, paleoconservatives, counter-
      jihadists, and neoreactionaries’ (Sedgwick, 2019: xiii, xiv).
      Consequently, inductive, data-driven, studies of the political right
      online often identify ‘communities’ rather than ideologies, giving them
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    169     
                                                             
        names which have emerged from within this political subculture: the
        ‘Intellectual Dark Web’, the ‘Alt-lite’ and the ‘Alt-right’ (e.g. Ribeiro
        et al., 2019). Lewis’s study of political connectivity on YouTube identi-
        fied an ‘Alternative Influence Network’, ‘an interlocking series of videos,
        references, and guest appearances’ involving self-defined conservatives,
        libertarians and white nationalists united in ‘general opposition to fem-
        inism, social justice, or left-wing politics’ and collaborating ‘to the point
        that ideological differences become impossible to take at face value’
        (Lewis, 2018: 8). Building on Lewis, Munger and Philips (2019) propose
        a five-part classification: ‘liberals’, such as podcaster Joe Rogan, who
        interviews celebrities alongside a range of political writers; ‘sceptics’,
        unconvinced by ‘identity politics’ centred on gender or race; ‘conserva-
        tives’, commentators who combine opposition to identity politics with
        pro-market traditionalism and also contribute to ‘old’ media; ‘alt-lite’
        provocateurs; and those most committed to far-right racial politics –
        the ‘alt-right’.                                     
         These descriptions of how things appear within digital media help
        organise a large field and distinguish some of its parts. But suchanalyses
        paint only a part of the picture and can be complemented by research
        drawingonthehistoryanddevelopmentofpoliticalideasandideologies.
        Here, studies find that white nationalism is the ‘centre of gravity’ of the
        alt-right (Lyons, 2017; see also Hawley, 2017; Nagle, 2017; Neiwert,
        2017). This includes ‘traditional’ forms of neo-Nazism (as found on
        anti-Semitic and conspiracist podcast and website The Right Stuff) and
        those presenting what Hawley calls a more ‘highbrow’ appearance. For
        example, through the original alternativeright.com which he founded,
        and latterly through the anti-Semitic Radix Journal, Richard Spencer
        has attempted to develop in America the kind of cultural ‘metapolitics’
        associated with the European New Right.1             
         Less Europhilic expressions are found on sites with their roots in
        American paleoconservatism (Lyons, 2017; Nagle, 2017: 54–67;
        Hawley, 2017: 9–33; also Woltermann, 1993; Drolet and Williams,
        2020). Here, economically as well as politically nationalist ideas blend
        with Christianity, defence of ‘traditional’ sex-roles and opposition to
        immigration. An example is the ethnonationalist website American
        Renaissance (formerly a print publication), founded by racial segrega-
        tionist Jared Taylor (see Taylor, 2011; Nieli, 2019). The core of his argu-
        ment is that racial differences are a feature of natural reality, ‘an
        important aspect of individual and group identity and the most import-
        ant of all societal fault lines’. Taylor draws in particular on the thinking
        of Samuel T. Francis, the paleoconservative thinker fired from The
        Washington Post for speaking (at an American Renaissance conference)
        against ‘the anti-white racialist movement’, the ‘fraudulent’ liberalism of
        MartinLutherKing andMandela, andinfavourof thepolitical unityof
        the white race (Francis, 2014).                      

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      170                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        WhereAmerican Renaissance foregrounds the‘white’ in ‘white nation-
      alism’, other anti-immigration sites such as VDare foreground the
      nationalism. Founded by former National Review columnist Peter
      Brimelow, VDare claims an educational mission, asking ‘the national
      question’ and committed to informing ‘the fight to keep America
      American’. Here the core political propositions are that nation-states
      must be culturally unified, America’s is an identity ‘unique to history’,
      and that human differences – ‘philosophical, cultural or biological’ – are
      grounded in race and ethnicity. Diversity therefore weakens polities.2
        Both sites draw on claims about the heritability of traits and their
      incidence by race and gender, so-called ‘sex-realism’ and ‘race-realism’,
      sometimes‘HumanBio-Diversity’(HBD)(Hawley,2017:67–8),thename
      ofanonlinediscussionforumcreatedbyanotherformerNationalReview
      journalist (and VDare contributor), Steve Sailer. Here, political argu-
      ments are presented as scientific truths which others are too weak or
      scared to articulate. HBD-focused twitter feed ‘Uncensored Science’
      describesitselfas‘Bringingyouthelatestincensoredpoliticallyincorrect
      truth’, and the website http://humanbiologicaldiversity.com quotes
      Orwell on its masthead: ‘In a time of universal deceit, telling the truth is
      arevolutionaryact’.VDareclaimsitembodies‘aboldidea’heldto‘inthe
      face of unwavering hostility from the Main Stream Media’.
        Emphasis on race differences is not confined to conservatives and
      nationalists. Canadian libertarian ‘anarcho-capitalist’ YouTuber Stefan
      Molyneux promoted such ‘realism’ to 900,000 subscribers to his channel
      (hosting Brimelow and Taylor, self-help author Jordan Peterson, Noam
      Chomsky and a range of right-of-centre ideological entrepreneurs). He
      presents himself as a philosopher, blending Randian style ‘objectivism’
      with libertarian anti-statism and intense belief in the significance and
      evolutionary basis of race and sex differences. The latter is prominent
      in the so-called ‘manosphere’ and the writings of, for example, far-right,
      neopagan advocate of ‘male tribalism’ Jack Donovan (see Lyons, 2019)
      and anti-feminist conspiracy theorist Mike Cernovich. The last of these
      rose to online prominence in large part because of ‘Gamergate’ in 2014,
      thesemi-organised,volubleandaggressiveonlinecontestationoftherole
      of women in the computer gaming industry. This bewilderingly signifi-
      cant phenomenon catalysed the crystallisation of a variety of hitherto
      inchoate online political trends, demonstrating the commercial viability
      of a new kind of ideological entrepreneurship and the capacity of con-
      tributionstodiscussionforumsand‘chans’tocrossoverontomainstream
      platforms such as YouTube, Twitter and Reddit, reshaping public dis-
      course about gender politics and feminism (Nagel, 2017: 19–24; Burgess
      and Matamoros-Ferna´ndez, 2016; Massanari, 2017; Salter, 2018).
      Through Gamergate, themes from ‘sex-realism’ were circulated across
      platforms, giving them a wider audience (bringing with them themes
      from ‘race-realism’, paleoconservatism and nationalism).

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    171     
                                                             
         Elsewhere, ideological entrepreneurs have appealed to tech entrepre-
        neurs in the form of the ‘neoreactionary’ movement or ‘Dark
        Enlightenment’, a baroque, techno-futurist, political philosophy
        (Burrows, 2018; Tait, 2019). Here belief in natural hierarchy is not
        restricted to the categories of race and gender but part of an argument
        for empowering the few capable of resisting the dominance of liberal
        humanism, figuratively represented as ‘the cathedral’ of academia, pol-
        iticsandjournalism.Neoreactionadvocatesthedissolutionofthesemon-
        asteries so that a new elite can accelerate technological innovation and
        institute the order of artificial intelligences which it sees as our destiny
        and salvation.                                       
         Adifferentstrandofonlinepoliticalideology–theso-called‘alt-lite’–
        is distinguishable by its style of ‘irreverent assault on political correct-
        ness’ (Hawley, 2017: 141). Polemical, vulgar and ironic, it wages pro-
        vocative discursive and aesthetic warfare on liberalism, exulting in the
        reaction. For example, the UK-based Paul Joseph Watson tells 1.8 mil-
        lion subscribers to his YouTube channel that liberalism is a ‘mental dis-
        order’ (Watson, 2015b) and feminists are ‘fat and ugly’ (Watson, 2015a).
        Such ‘bad manners’ exemplify the ‘populist style’ identified by Moffit
        (2016). Disseminated through online posting boards and chans with a
        commonverbalandvisualvocabulary,thisstyleshapessubculturaliden-
        tities through which individuals learn about political ideas and promote
        them by creating and sharing jokes, memes and ‘shitposts’ (Topinka,
        2018; Fielitz and Thurston, 2019). Such gestural ‘transgression’ and
        demonstrative non-conformity is characteristic of online subcultures
        acrosstheinternet(Phillips,2016).Nageliscorrectthatthisisaresponse
        to‘calloutculture’(2017:68–85),butitisapoliticalresponseintendedto
        unsettle,uprootandexposeliberalconsensusasmereconvention.Thatis
        a well-established rhetorical tactic (Chambers and Finlayson, 2008). An
        indicative example is mockery of ‘the argument from the current year’.
        Declarations such as ‘It’s 2021! How can you say that?’, in response to
        expressionscontrarytoliberalsocialvalues,implybeliefintheinevitable
        and harmonious flow of progress. Shitposters provoke so as to ‘reveal’
        that liberalism rests on this unacknowledged metaphysical conviction
        aboutthenecessarydestinyof humanity, representedas aquasi-religious
        faith recited by, in internet slang, ‘NPCs’, people like the Non-Playable
        Characters in video games who can say and do only what they are
        programmed to.                                       
         A different sort of self-conscious and self-declared transgression char-
        acterises the so-called ‘Intellectual Dark Web’ or ‘IDW’ (Weiss, 2018), a
        label used by supporters to refer to a range of political writers, including
        psychologist Jordan Peterson and Douglas Murray, associate editor at
        TheSpectator.Articulatinga(familiar)critiqueof‘tenuredradicals’,they
        are described as ‘iconoclastic’, ‘academic renegades’ with views ‘that
        sound unlike anything else happening, at least publicly, in the culture

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      172                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      right now’ (Weiss, 2018). The academy is identified with conformist lib-
      eralism, accused of putting ideology above science, distanced from the
      cultureandvaluesofthenation,corruptedbyitsembraceoftheprinciple
      of campus diversity yet too cowardly to stand up to students’ identity
      politics and complaints of microaggression. These writers speak from
      traditional, pre-digital, bases of authority (commercial media and uni-
      versityprofessorships) buthavefoundsignificantaudiencesandcounter-
      cultural cache through podcasts, YouTube and other social media
      (especially The Rubin Report, The Daily Wire and the Rogan podcast).
      Their public lectures and TV appearances are widely recirculated, re-
      edited and commented on, forming supplementary content produced
      by ideological entrepreneurs with smaller markets.     
        We find, then, a range of ‘ideological entrepreneurs’ opposed to ‘pro-
      gressivism and social reform’. Digital communication has increased their
      reach and potential prominence, creating a ‘marketplace of ideas’ within
      whichanincreasingrangeofconservativeandreactionaryideologiesmay
      compete for a share of success. For these, inequality is a core concept,
      understood as a natural phenomenon, scientifically verified, and the
      necessary basis of civil order, essential to the maintenance of individual
      freedom,economicstabilityandculturalcoherence;liberalism’sfailureto
      recognise the reality of inequality is leading to civilisational decline and
      illegitimate domination, and must be exposed as ungrounded, irrational
      andagainstnature.Theseentrepreneursdifferinstyleandcontent,draw-
      ing on different parts of the reactionary ideological tradition. However,
      as we shall see, their internal coherence and their relations with each
      other are fundamentally changed by the online platforms that now
      bring them to market.                                  
      Ideologies Online                                      
      Political ideologies (the ‘isms’ organising politics) may be understood,
      following Freeden (1998), as distinct combinations of political concepts
      through which the contested ideas of politics are temporarily ‘decon-
      tested’ and shared politics made possible. Certain concepts are fixed as
      ‘core’, anchoring the whole, with other ‘adjacent’ concepts, supplement-
      ing or modifying that core while those at the ‘periphery’ are linked to
      applications of the ideology and responses to events. Over time, in
      response to social change, political events, ideological contestation and
      innovation, concepts change their places. Some increase in importance
      whileothersfadefromsignificance.Theoreticalandhistoricalanalysisof
      politicalideologiesisconcernedwithidentifying,mappingandexplaining
      that process.                                          
        Political ideologies are not fixed categories but fields of relatively con-
      tained contestation. Digital communication dramatically changes how
      such contestation happens, disrupting the boundaries of ideological
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    173     
                                                             
        intellectual traditions, makingthempartsofbroader,looser‘fields’, fluid
        ‘ideological families’ (Freeden, 2013: 127–8). Three things are most
        important here. Firstly, as we have seen, digital media increase the
        volume of participants in ideological production and circulation. This
        flooding of the marketplace of ideas also changes its shape.
        Constituencies ‘constrained by the scope of the ideology of extant
        media’ may now ‘switch into consuming media more consistent with
        their ideal points’ (Munger and Philips, 2019: 12). That facilitates (or
        forces) new kinds of consolidation and differentiation of political pos-
        itions in ways driven by that market as well as by conceptual logics
        internal to ideological traditions.                  
         Secondly,digitalmediafurthererodetheauthorityandeffectivenessof
        traditionalgatekeepersofideologicalpurity.Thecoversofabook,copy-
        right claims of an author and rules of political party meetings set clear,
        albeit porous, boundaries to constellations of political ideas and policy
        proposals, giving them identifiable origins and specifiable destinations
        while policing their limits. Ideological traditions and their canons have
        notsurvivedtheonslaughtoffluidmediawhichdisorganisesuchlineages,
        overflowing the boundaries of national political cultures, increasing the
        range of resources from which political ideas and arguments are made.
        Theinherentlyintertextualnatureofonlinecommunication, thespeedof
        its decontextualisation and recontextualisation, the ease with which con-
        sumers move between sources and resources, unsettles classifications of
        politicalgenre.Memes,‘spreadable’media(MihailidisandViotty,2017),
        move ideas, themes, the argot and discursive style of trolling subculture
        from the ‘fringe’ into the ‘mainstream’ in a way which blurs that very
        distinction (Phillips, 2016). Key sites or individuals are condensation
        pointsforaneclecticrangeofideaswhilephrasesandslogans,fragments
        of propositions broken free of the arguments within which they first
        appeared, flow across forms and forums, picked up by individuals plot-
        tingtheirownpaththroughthem.Forexample,LewisshowshowJordan
        Peterson, a mainstream figure from the ‘Intellectual Dark Web’, is con-
        nected with fringe participants like Richard Spencer through the appear-
        anceseachmade,discussingIQ,ontheYouTubechannelrunby‘Sargon
        of Akkad’, a Swindon-based UKIP member (Lewis, 2018: 9). Peterson
        and Spencer are not politically indistinguishable, but the medium brings
        them into the same discursive universe from the perspective of viewers,
        literallyputtingthemonthesamepageofalgorithmicallygeneratedview-
        ingrecommendations;fragmentsofclaimsaboutpsychology,natureand
        geneticsflowonlinebetweenandaroundthem.Insuchideologicalassem-
        blages ‘diverse elements infiltrate into the others, metabolizing into a
        moving complex’ (Connolly, 2005: 870).               
         In the cauldrons of the internet, the heat of emotions, reactions and
        disputations, the speed of experimentation, testing and adaptation, force
        ideas to cohere in new ways. What might have seemed historically,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      174                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      culturally and rationally distinct is bound by the force and fire of algo-
      rithmic,affectiveandaestheticcongruence.Thearrangementofconcepts
      comprising white nationalist and mainstream conservative politics is dif-
      ferent, even contradictory (Hawley, 2017: 91–114), but alt-right rhetoric
      builds stylistic bridges between them (Hartzell, 2018). Contradictory and
      conflicting positions have converged around ‘radical conservatism’
      (Dahl, 1999), united by dramatic performances and expressions of
      hostility to ‘liberalism’. At one end is the ‘alt-right’ critique of what
      paleoconservative intellectual Samuel T. Francis called ‘the universalist
      world-view’ for which ‘there is neither history nor race nor even species,
      neither specific cultures nor particular peoples nor meaningful bound-
      aries’andwhich,hesays,‘hasassumedseveraldifferentnames:Marxism,
      liberalism, globalism, egalitarianism’ (2014: 48). At another end is
      DouglasMurray’schargesagainst‘liberaldogmatism’and‘metaphysics’,
      which he associates with the continued influence of Marxists (Murray,
      2019: 467–8; 104–23). In between are all kinds of ‘alt-lite’ mockery of
      ‘woke’ culture. Though placing different emphases on concepts such as
      tradition, order and religion, all advance arguments about natural and
      scientifically identifiable inequalities which put them in a polemical rela-
      tionship with a liberalism they understand to be based on denial of
      nature, at variance with reality, hostile to science and successful only
      because forcefully imposed by institutions of education, and systems of
      communication controlled by cynical and elitist ‘universal’ intellectuals,
      ready to deploy the weapons of censure and censorship. From far-right
      racist ideologies to mainstream conservatism, that analysis is articulated
      and performed as an unpalatable truth revealed by brave, honest, sub-
      versive,thinkersunafraidtochallengeestablishedpower.Weturnnextto
      how that power is conceptualised, its errors and corrupting influence
      named and ‘revealed’.                                  
      The ‘New Class’                                        
      The idea of the ‘new class’ has a long and varied history (Barbrook,
      2006). Understanding and explaining the significance of white-collar
      managerial, knowledge and cultural workers has been such a preoccupa-
      tionofpost-warsocialsciencethat,asoneobserved,‘anentirehistoryof
      political sociology could be written on the theme of the ‘‘new middle
      classes’’’ (Ross, 1978: 163). That ‘new class’ has been thought definitive
      of post-industrial knowledge societies (e.g. Bell, 1973), identified as a
      secular and technical intelligentsia inevitably conflicting with existing
      traditions and authorities (Gouldner, 1979), considered a new source
      of anti-capitalist resistance (Touraine, 1971) and as central to new
      modes of workplace domination, control and surveillance (Carchedi,
      1987). More recently it has been given various names (and invested
      with various hopes) in mainstream political discourse. In the 1990s
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    175     
                                                             
        ‘third way’ political economy, future growth and development were
        believed to require development of a global knowledge and information
        economy within which skilled and adaptable individuals could flourish
        through expressing their creativity and employing their cognitive cap-
        acity. Across Europe social democrats came to think that knowledge
        was a form of capital owned by the worker and that intensifying it was
        therefore egalitarian and liberatory (Andersson, 2010). It followed that
        socialjusticecouldbestbeachievednotbylimitingthedominationofthe
        labour market but by equipping individuals with the social, cultural and
        other capitals needed to compete fully within it. Discrimination (on the
        basisofrace,gender,disability)wasabreachofrightsbutalso,becauseit
        limitedthemovementofknowledge-capital,economicallydamaging.The
        future depended on supporting and empowering ‘the Symbolic Analysts,
        theVirtualClass,theDigerati,theDigitalCitizen,theSwarmCapitalists,
        the New Barbarians, the Bobos, the Netocracy and the Creative Class’
        (Barbrook, 2006: 23).                                
         If such figurations of the ‘new class’ have been central to technocratic
        liberalism,theyhavebeenjustasimportantforitsopponents.Inthe20th
        century, left-wing critics of communism developed a critique of bureau-
        cratic ‘state capitalism’ which has become centralto 21st-century conser-
        vatism. For example, the American James Burnham, having identified
        the new class with industrial managers, went on to abandon Trotskyism
        in favour of conservatism, helping to found The National Review. His
        1964 The Suicide of the West, influential across the conservative spec-
        trum, especially for paleoconservatives, rhetorically redescribes liberal-
        ism as the ideology of ‘opinion-makers, molders and transmitters’,
        university and school teachers, journalists, people in the arts and ‘ver-
        balists inallbranchesof government’(Burnham,1964:32).Because they
        believe that nothing in mutable human nature hinders the establishment
        of peace, freedom, justice and wellbeing (1964: 50), liberals, Burnham
        argues, conceive of social problems as outcomes of ignorance and badly
        designedinstitutions. Consequently,politicsbecomes‘educationgeneral-
        ised’ (1964: 72) and liberalism, elevating justice over freedom, increases
        state power over individuals while failing to defend the nation from
        enemies without and criminals within. It is blinded to reality by its egali-
        tarianism,the‘quantitativereductionofhumanbeingstoCommonMan’
        and the rejection of ‘qualitative distinctions’ (1964: 288).
         For later writers such as Irving Kristol, also once committed to
        Trotskyism (Kristol, 1977), the new class consisted of a very wide
        range of occupations: ‘scientists, teachers and educational administra-
        tors,journalistsandothersinthecommunicationsindustries’and‘psych-
        ologists, social workers, those lawyers and doctors who make their
        careers in the expanding public sector, city planners, the staffs of large
        foundations, the upper level of the government bureaucracy’ (Kristol,
        1978: 27) – a wide range of roles, aligned and linked with the welfare

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      176                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      state, and targets for neoliberal critiques of state inefficiency. Paul
      Gottfried, an academic, former student of Marcuse (and mentor to
      Richard Spencer), has effectively updated Burnham by drawing on
      Hayek, von Mises and Ruggiero (Gottfried, 1999: 9–11), although
      here, instead of suicide, liberals have committed ‘patricide’ (1999: xi),
      abandoning their 19th-century progenitors for social planning in the
      name of ‘humanitarian and ‘‘scientific’’ goals’ achieved through man-
      agerial and judicial intervention (1999: 5). Welfare ‘entitlements’ are
      symptoms of the new class capture of the state, creating permanent cli-
      ents to keep it in power, supplanting Republican ideals of simplicity and
      frugality with self-indulgence and luxury, turning aristocratic vices into
      virtues (1999: 34–5). Socialism has been replaced by ‘a more enduring
      formofcollectivism’andadministrationconvertedinto‘aninstrumentof
      equity’ (1999: 55); ideals of pluralism and cultural inclusion disguise
      ‘behavioural coercion’ of those who ‘think differently’ (1999: 88). Of
      particular harm, says Gottfried, are the ‘antisocial postmodernist
      values of New Class verbalists’ (1999: 72) who have subverted education
      by turning it into a means for shaping ‘social personality’. That position
      is echoed online by Jordan Peterson when he claims that ‘Departments
      like Women’s Studies have trained between three-hundred thousand and
      three-million radical left-wingactivists’ (Palkin, 2016)andthat‘thepost-
      modernist types have infiltrated bureaucratic organizations at the mid to
      upperlevelandthat’sactuallywhatthey’retrainedtodobytheiractivist
      professors in university’ (Epoch Times, 2017).         
        The political potential of a movement defined by opposition to this
      newclasshasbeenidentifiedbyavarietyofobservers.Forexample,Paul
      Piccone,founderandeditorfor30yearsofthejournalTelos,longargued
      that the left/right division obscured struggles ‘not between capital and
      labour, but between those with cultural and political capital and those
      without’ (quoted in Raventos, 2002: 138; also Lowndes, 2017). He used
      the journal to develop the influential argument that new-class cultural
      power is the fundamental source of domination in consumer capitalist
      democracies, publishing Marxian critiques alongside those of paleocon-
      servatives and the European New Right, proposing that populist oppos-
      ition to it is the centre of radical resistance today. In the UK former
      membersoftheRevolutionaryCommunistParty,groupedaroundonline
      magazine Spiked, have implemented such a strategy becoming influential
      within the British Conservative government (Beckett, 2020). In America,
      conservativelibertarianMurrayRothbardadvocatedastrategyof‘right-
      wing populism’ shaped by antagonism to ‘politicians and bureaucrats
      allied with ... powerful corporate and Old Money financial elites ...
      Ivy League academics and media elites, who constitute the opinion-
      moulding class in society’ (Rothbard, 1992). For F.H. Buckley, law pro-
      fessor, senior editor at the American Spectator and speechwriter for
      Trump, his candidate stood opposed to the ‘new class’ (Buckley, 2016)

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    177     
                                                             
        andwonbecausepeoplewantedtodestroytheadministrativestateithad
        created, bringing down the aristocracy of ‘well-credentialed’ elites ‘atop
        the greasy pole’ (Buckley, 2018). Steve Bannon, speaking at CPAC in
        2017 while still working for the Trump administration, stated that the
        three goals of the presidency would be national security, economic
        nationalism and ‘deconstruction of the administrative state’.
         A range of ideological currents – conservatism, nationalism, ethnona-
        tionalism,libertarianism–shareacritiqueoftheliberalstatewhichgives
        toitaculturalandintellectualratherthaneconomicclasscharacter.That
        critique emphasises the linguistic and discursive power of ‘new class’
        intellectuals, exercised through institutions of culture, communication
        and legal regulation, oppressing or victimising those with contrary cul-
        tural,politicalandethicalorientations.Todaythisanalysisisthebasisof
        a broad-based systematic challenge to the technocratic politics of third-
        way neoliberalism and globalisation. The new class is the common
        enemy, under a variety of names: ‘the establishment’, ‘the swamp’, ‘the
        blob’, ‘the cathedral’. Because followers can characterise members of
        thesegroupsvariouslyasbureaucrats,intellectuals,civilservants,climate
        scientists, gender theorists, feminists, public sector workers, journalists,
        screenwriters, specific ethnic groups and so on, this antagonism sustains
        an otherwise unlikely alliance of Trump supporters, online ‘Men Going
        Their Own Way’, Christian Identity militias, radical libertarians, ethno-
        nationalists, anti-feminists, American paleoconservatives, ‘race realists’,
        anti-Muslims, anti-communists. Online and offline that equivalence is
        intensified through common rhetorical repertoires, shared reference
        points, forms and styles of argumentation which make up a distinct
        ‘community of discourse’ (Salazar, 2018), a counter-cultural rhetoric of
        enmity against the ‘verbalists’.                     
        Figures of Anti-Liberalism                           
        Critical sociological analysis of the new class sees it as an outcome of
        high-level features of modernity – secularisation, bureaucratisation, de-
        traditionalisation – and also of specific changes to family structure and
        labour markets, the blurring of national-cultural boundaries, the exten-
        sionofgovernmentalpastoralpower.Butcontemporaryreactionarypol-
        itics finds these things to be effects, not causes, manifestations of the
        political predilections and interests of the new class. Similarly, claims
        to equality made on behalf of various groups, because they lack a
        basis in natural reality, must be mystifications of new class ideology.
        Thus ‘identity politics’ can be explained not with reference to histories
        of economic or juridical organisation but to strategic political interven-
        tion.Peterson,inalecturecriticisingtheconceptof‘whiteprivilege’,says
        he ‘can’t quite figure out why the postmodernists have made the canon-
        ical distinctions they’ve made – race, ethnicity, sexual proclivity, sexual
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      178                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      gender identity’. His answer is that ‘you privilege some of those dimen-
      sions over the other’ because ‘it sustains your bloody Marxist interpret-
      ation, that’s why’.                                    
        For any ideological formation ‘naming the enemy’, revealing its hand
      and enumerating its guises is important political work. In this case that
      work is focused on awakening people to the presence of the ‘new class’,
      the varied guises it may take, showing how we are dominated by it and
      dispelling its mythology. Online culture has generated a variety of new
      figures and tropes for achieving this goal. In the past the new class has
      been metaphorised as the ‘bureaucrat’, ‘civil servant’, ‘academic’ and
      ‘journalist’. Anonymous posting boards such as 4chan – in its day an
      incredibly influential part of a ‘deep vernacular web’ (Zeeuw and Tuters,
      2020),asourceof‘memeticantagonism’(TutersandHagen,2020)andof
      munitions for semiotic warfare against rules of all kinds (Hine et al.,
      2017;Tutersetal.,2018)–havehelpedcreateandpropagateothermyth-
      ical, metaphorical, ‘archetypes’ such as the ‘Social Justice Warrior’
      (Massanari and Chess, 2018). Amplified through Gamergate, the
      mytheme of the ‘SJW’ connotes a ‘monstrous feminine’ figure
      (Massanari and Chess, 2018), a student, a millennial, a young woman
      aggressively sanctioning others, irrational yet powerful, superficially
      motivated by political commitment but in truth by a desire for social
      approvalandadvanceinthecorruptworldofthenewclass.Thatclassis
      figuredasthe‘CulturalMarxist’.Thislabelforarangeofperspectives in
      social and political theory predates the internet. Its origins lie in paleo-
      conservative writing from where it has developed into a conspiracy
      theory, holding that acolytes of the Frankfurt School are enacting a
      plan to undermine America by promoting feminism and anti-racism
      (Jamin, 2014). Online the idea has taken on new life (Richardson,
      2015; Manavis, 2019), becoming shorthand for the argument that
      claims to racial or gender equality are a spurious invention of those
      with a sinister hidden ‘agenda’ (Peterson, 2017; Murray, 2019). The
      Cultural Marxist is a jargonising guru mesmerising impressionable stu-
      dents,exploitingthemfinanciallywhilecovertlyandcalculatedlydestroy-
      ing Western culture by encouraging immigration. The idea has been
      taken up by Members of Parliament and circulated in magazines such
      as The Spectator (Walker, 2019). Along with the ‘SJW’, the figure is
      centraltoapoliticalrhetoricwhichhasemergedfromthefusionofoffline
      and online reactionary spaces, theinhabitants of which seethemselves as
      involved in a war for hearts and minds, teaching others to see the invis-
      ible left-hand behind events, and to learn how to protect themselves by
      becoming part of the cultural, intellectual and moral resistance. Jordan
      Peterson, for instance, advises school students to leave their classes if
      teachers begin discussing diversity, inclusivity or equity, to video it and
      post it to YouTube (Peterson, 2018). Such awareness and resistance are
      most powerfully conveyed through the rhetoric of ‘the red pill’.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    179     
                                                             
         Ina1976interviewFrenchNewRighttheoristAlaindeBenoistadvo-
        cated an ‘awakening’, a metaphysical, metapolitical, cultural struggle
        against the ideology of egalitarianism which convinces people by appeal-
        ing to universal reason. Its opponents had to speak to ‘the heart and
        soul’,using‘imagesratherthanconcepts’inorderto‘bringtothesurface
        a sensibility which has been repressed in the unconscious of our peoples
        bytwo-thousandyearsofegalitarianism’(quotedinTaguieff,1993:111).
        Such an affective politics of the image, structured by the trope of awa-
        kening,andof‘revelation’, iscapturedbythe‘redpill’,areferencetothe
        film The Matrix, in which the hero is invited to take a red pill which will
        enable him to see beyond illusion, the reality that humanity is trapped in
        a computer simulation (Ging, 2017; Aikin, 2019). Online, ‘taking the red
        pill’ or being ‘red pilled’ names an experience of political-cultural awa-
        kening, the revelation that the new class (in media, government and
        education) is propagating falsehoods in which they do not themselves
        believe: the universality of humanity, natural equality, progress. Shared
        stories of taking the red pill are conversion narratives about the struggle
        to open the mind, of finding the courage to go beyond the boundaries of
        conventional thought and discourse, accepting that the natural facts of
        inequalityarethebasisfortruepoliticalreasoning.AsLewisnotes,these
        narratives often manifest as personal ‘ideological testimonials’, a
        common form of online ‘influencer’ marketing (2018: 25–8).
         Red-pilling, then, is a familiar trope about political consciousness,
        here connected with powerful tropes of secrecy and revelation.
        YouTuber Paul Joseph Watson is typical in regularly titling videos
        ‘The Truth About...’ and ‘What they’re NOT telling you’ (Finlayson,
        2020), as is men’s rights podcaster Mike Cernovich when he documents
        ‘fakenews’inhisbookHoaxed:EverythingTheyToldYouisaLie.These
        themes have a lineage in liberal conceptions of publicity and transpar-
        ency where they are a means for the regulation of government. But
        stories of the red pill, rather than emphasise transparency, scrutiny and
        deliberation, focus on the subject of revelation who learns to recognise
        thehiddenmeaningofwordsandhowtogivethingstheirtruename.The
        red pill inoculates individuals from infection by liberalism. It’s taking is
        part of a hero’s journey across the gap separating conventional thinking
        from ideas which, because they are ‘edgy’, beyond the boundaries, are
        proof of the free, independent, spirit articulating them. Thus the red pill
        trope sanctions unconventional, profane speech, objections to which are
        to be expected from the NPCs, and proof of true insight. Tactics of
        demonstrative disruption and rejection of norms follow: calls to boycott
        classes, ‘politically incorrect’ discourse, performed rejections of the pre-
        cepts of egalitarianism, circulating unreadable or seemingly meaningless
        memes and ‘copypasta’ (Topinka, forthcoming). The space of digital
        media is, then, a theatre of ‘culture war’, a proving ground for those
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      180                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      demonstrating their skill at semiotic combat, their individualism and
      freedom. It is also a marketplace.                     
                                                             
                                                             
      Neoliberal Salvation                                   
      The unifying ‘essence’ of contemporary radical conservatism (online and
      offline) is hostility to ‘the new class’ and to its works: cultural and eco-
      nomic globalisation, the erosion of national cultures, gender equality,
      racial diversity, the deregulation of labour markets and other goals of
      ‘knowledge economy’ social democrats, third-way progressives, New
      Democrats. In this respect we might see such reactionary politics as a
      formation largely opposed to neoliberalism. However, hostility to
      technocrats is also part of a Hayekian objection to the extension of
      state power in the name of social justice (Hawley, 2017: 34–5;
      Slobodian, 2018). That connection in theory is affirmed in style.
        Neoliberalism is not only a political and economic philosophy. It is
      also a means of governing through practices of the self, shaped by an
      ideal of the ‘entrepreneurial subject’ (Foucault, 2008) immersed in com-
      petition, seeking always to ‘maximize his results by exposing himself to
      risks and taking full responsibility for possible failures’ (Dardot and
      Laval, 2013). That subject – imbued with the ‘new spirit’ of capitalism
      – is an expression of what McNay describes as the ‘wide-ranging appli-
      cation of the idea of human capital to decipher all kinds of social rela-
      tions,fromeducation,genetics,socialmobilityandmigrationtothemost
      intimate of interactions’ (2009: 59), interpellating us, as Wendy Brown
      argues, as ‘entrepreneurial actors in every sphere of life’ (Brown, 2005:
      42). To take the red pill is to accept such an interpellation without res-
      ervation; to see that behind the mystifications of the SJWs and Cultural
      Marxists, reality is a power struggle between unequals. Thus, on the
      men’s rights red pill forum on Reddit, the central revelation is that
      sexualandmarriagerelations,whichmenaresaidtobenaturallyinclined
      to think of ‘idealistically’, are really domains of economic and genetic
      competition: women seek to exploit their partners, financially and bio-
      logically, marrying and living off the compliant, hard-working ‘beta’
      male while seeking evolutionarily better impregnation by the dominant,
      aggressive ‘alpha’ (Dignam and Rohlinger, 2019). Feminism is thus con-
      strued as a kind of anti-competitive behaviour, disrupting sexual and
      marriage markets through collective action (Ging, 2017). As one poster
      to Reddit explained: ‘Feminism is a sexual strategy. It puts women into
      the best position they can find, to select mates, to determine when they
      wanttoswitchmates,tolocate thebestDNApossible, andtogarnerthe
      most resources they can individually achieve’ (quoted in Van
      Valkenburgh, 2018: 6). The appeal of the red pill is that it frees those
      whotakeitfromthefalse-consciousnessofegalitarianism,enablingthem
      to improve their strategic action in market situations. Participants in

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    181     
                                                             
        men’s rights forums seek education in how to project ‘alpha-male’ qua-
        lities, using ‘pick-up’ techniques to become profitable entrepreneurs of
        thesexualmarketplace.VanValkenburghhighlightsredpillforummem-
        bers’ interest in rational-actor theories, their application of authors such
        as Becker and Baumeister to sexual relationships as a praxeology,
        increasing ‘Sexual Market Value’ (2018: 14–15).      
         This orientation is reaffirmed – and naturalised – by the competitive
        andacquisitive formatofonlinecommunication platformsandbyonline
        cultures of ‘debate’. In its theory of human action neoliberalism ‘priori-
        tizes an agonistic dimension: competition and rivalry’ (Dardot and
        Laval, 2013: 103). For Schumpeter the entrepreneurial motivation
        wasn’t merely hedonistic or dynastic but marked by a ‘will to conquer’,
        to‘proveoneselfsuperiortoothers’.Economicactionwas‘akintosport’,
        featuring ‘financial races, or rather boxing-matches’ in which financial
        outcome is secondary to the display of one’s victory. In online political
        culture such competition is celebrated and has economic value. The
        heroic individual, freed from convention, can enact opposition to the
        SJWs and Cultural Marxists, in a competition through which he
        proves himself. Structured as reward-based systems for the creation
        and distribution of communicative content, social media platforms,
        wherevalueandsuccessaremeasuredinupvotes,karmaandsubscribers,
        induce and naturalise behaviours oriented to the achievement and cele-
        brationofremunerativesuccessinthe‘marketplaceofideas’.Freespeech
        and debate are understood not primarily as means for verifying consta-
        tive utterances but as domains for the demonstration of transgressive
        discursive skill. Thus, for example, the phenomena of ‘internet blood-
        sports’,‘no-holdsbarred’debateabout‘prohibited’topics,ofvideocom-
        pilationsof clipstitled ‘XdestroysSJW’, ‘X’ssavagecomebacks’, posted
        as proof of success in virtuous combat. Similarly, discourses of ‘resili-
        ence’ often associated with neoliberal modes of governmentality are
        reworked and repurposed within forums filled with advice on fitness,
        gym culture, the use of nootropics as well as reading lists and other
        guides on self-development. One has to learn to protect oneself from
        the intrusions and depredations of liberal modernity, to see when one
        is being fooled and live outside of society. YouTuber Paul Joseph
        Watson writes that ‘The battle begins at home’, against feelings of
        depression and self-loathing, and one must learn self-respect so as to
        be able to escape false reality. Cernovich’s Gorilla Mindset, subtitled
        ‘how to control your thoughts and emotions to live life on your own
        terms’, offers techniques to help readers become confident, maintain
        focus, be physically fit and financially secure by branding themselves
        (what he calls ‘You Inc.’).                          
         For all that it appears as a restorationist critique of third-way neo-
        liberalism,thiscontemporaryconfigurationofreactionarypoliticsisvery
        muchintune–affectivelyandaesthetically–withtherhythmsandstyles

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      182                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      of what Byun-Hul Chan calls the ‘achievement society’. It celebrates
      heroic individualism, expressed as manly and victorious conduct in
      marketplaces of all kinds. It does not question the commodification of
      the self but reveals selves to have been priced incorrectly, the market
      rigged by SJWs, Cultural Marxists and administrative-state bureaucrats
      who let the wrong people win the competition. The subjects to whom it
      appealsaretoldthattheycanandshouldbetheverybestkindofhuman
      capital, honed by natural and cultural evolution. They are advised to
      prove this by waging a culture war which begins as a battle to free the
      self from the illusions of liberalism and acquire the confidence and self-
      reliance needed to be truly autonomised and responsibilised. We might
      say that such a politics invokes class consciousness but that, lacking a
      concept of class, it adverts to consciousness of the self. Online, collective
      political identifications are formed not out of geographic coincidence or
      ‘objective’ interests but as ‘affective publics’, agglomerations of selves,
      ‘mobilized and connected, identified and potentially disconnected
      through expressions of sentiment’ (Papacharissi, 2016). Thus, as Ging
      findsofmen’srightsforums,thediscourseismoreculturalthanpolitical,
      markedby‘preoccupationwithmen’spersonalrelationshipsandpsycho-
      logical and emotional pain rather than with collective political action’
      (2017: 648). Online political celebrities interpret the world for their fol-
      lowers, showing them what has been hidden. They cultivate ‘charismatic
      authority’, offering not so much a programme for a political movement
      as the promise, in Weber’s words, ‘to effect a subjective or internal
      reorientation born out of suffering, conflicts, or enthusiasm’ (Weber,
      1978: 245), a personal rather than political salvation. Weber also
      observed that charismatic authority rejects ‘rational economic conduct’
      (1978: 244), generating income through ‘honorific gifts, dues and other
      voluntary contributions’ (1978:1113) fromwhich followersmight obtain
      specialaccess to the charismatic anda sharein theiresteem (1978:1119).
        The structures of social media celebrity reproduce this kind of rela-
      tionship. Subscription to a channel is a basic form of membership of a
      community.Buthererationalaccumulationofwealthaffirmsratherthan
      undermines the charismatic’s authority, proving competitive fitness.
      When Jordan Peterson jokes to podcast host Joe Rogan that he has
      found a way ‘to monetise SJW’s’ it is a joke but also evidence of his
      virtuousentrepreneurship,andoftherewardsthatwillflowtothosewho
      come to share his truth by clicking like and subscribe. Here, form and
      content are as one. Online one can inhabit ideological conflict anywhere
      and all the time. Its very ubiquity is evidence of a political-economic
      ontology which demands that one participate in that online conflict,
      intensify it and win it. Success as an ideological entrepreneur is its own
      reward and its own proof.                              
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    183     
                                                             
        Conclusion                                           
                                                             
        To make sense of politics online we cannot look only online. We have
        also to attend to the histories of ideas and ideologies on which people
        draw when making sense of politics for themselves. But we cannot
        only look offline. The economic and technological organisation of
        platforms changes who has a chance to communicate political ideas,
        the verbal and visual languages in which they can do so and the
        relationships these establish with and between audiences. Digital, par-
        ticipatory and shareable media hugely increase the number of people
        who can act as ideological entrepreneurs endlessly revising, reusing
        and recirculating political ideas and arguments, moving them in and
        out of all sorts of contexts. This has eroded the boundaries between
        and within ideologies (and, indeed, between ideologies and entertain-
        ment, fan-culture, self-help and other genres of public communica-
        tion). Reviewing studies and examples of online ‘reactionary’ and
        ‘radical conservative’ politics, we found an expanded and fluid ideo-
        logical family, internally differentiated but united and organised
        around a concept of natural inequality and hostility to those who
        deny it, the ‘new class’ apprehended figuratively as the ‘SJW’ and
        ‘Cultural Marxist’. Its politics is articulated in part as a critique of
        a kind of ‘false-consciousness’, and it advocates ideological class con-
        flict in the name of restoring natural order.        
         Thepeopleexercising itmaynotshareaunifiedidentity orinterests in
        any simple sense, but ‘new-class’ discursive power is a real power, exer-
        cised over the public sphere, taking shape as rules about communicative
        behaviour, setting boundaries to the narratives of the culture industries,
        establishing criteria for judging between knowledge and ignorance. It is
        also powerful in workplaces where an increasingly important axis of
        conflict is between those with embedded practical skills and those in
        management and personnel working with abstract, discursive forms of
        knowledge (Kitschelt and Rehm, 2014). It is no surprise that this is con-
        tested. Digital participatory and shareable media make available new
        ways to challenge and to exercise interpersonal communicative and dis-
        cursive power, training one’s verbal force on the verbalists, transgressing
        theirrulesandexperiencingthepowerofthespeech-act.Whatfirstmani-
        fested as ‘below-the-line’ polemics against the communicative authority
        of journalists has turned into brute contestation of discursive power and
        rejection of all kinds of technical and scientific authority (of virologists,
        climatologists and economists, for example). That has given shape to –
        and been shaped by – the revival and renewal of a familiar ideological
        discourse of opposition to bureaucrats, academics and intellectuals now
        centraltorejectionofthird-wayneoliberalismandofgovernmentswhich
        refuse intervention into economic production while increasing oversight
        of cultural consumption.                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      184                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        Aspects of this backlash have been welcomed as a ‘return of the
      repressed’, an upsurge of popular hostility to the neoliberal consensus
      on globalisation and the suppression of working people’s rights (e.g.
      Streeck,2017).However,onlinereactionaryideologiesconnectsuchhos-
      tility with a critique of ‘social justice’ derived from and fully congruent
      withHayekianandrelatedformsofneoliberalism(Phelan,2019).Itis,as
      Slobodian (2018, 2019) puts it, a critique of neoliberalism formed within
      rather than against it. Furthermore, the bearers of this critique are par-
      ticipantsinamarketplace,anattentioneconomywhichrequires‘content
      creators’ to adapt to the communicative affordances of platforms which
      incentivise the cultivation of parasocial relationships with and between
      ‘subscribers’and‘followers’.Inthatmarketplace,charismaticideological
      entrepreneurs compete to reveal the follies and the ‘agenda’ of the ‘new
      class’,offeringtechniquesforresistingitsmystifications,‘doingyourown
      research’ and coming to self-consciousness. Latterly, QAnon has seized
      market share with a yet more stark political dramatisation, including the
      ‘revelation’ that the new class is literally demonic, predating on our chil-
      dren, with no limits to its depravity. Here resistance requires refusal to
      believe anything the journalists, scientists or politicians say; the SJWs,
      Cultural Marxists and universalist intellectuals will do anything, rig any
      election and tell any lie, to stay in power. In January of 2021 fidelity to
      the truth demanded that people protest, take up arms and storm the
      cathedral on Capitol Hill, but also that they film it, broadcast it live
      online and post about it on various messaging apps. In so doing, com-
      menting, sharing/recirculating, re-editing/reposting, theybecame content
      creators enroute to successful ideological entrepreneurship. This is not a
      post-neoliberal politics but one which demands the yet greater market-
      isationofideasandideologies,cultureandconsciousness.Itseeksanend
      toamonopolyofcommunicationitthinksisheldbythenew class,as an
      act not of political ‘liberation’ but of ‘creative destruction’, clearing the
      space on which new monopolies may be built. It is, we might say, a
      critique of new class verbalism formed within that class and not
      against it.                                            
      Acknowledgements                                       
      Thisarticlewaswrittenas partoftheresearch project‘Political Ideology,Rhetoricand
      AestheticsintheTwenty-FirstCentury:TheCaseofthe‘‘Alt-Right’’’,fundedbytheArts
      and Humanities Research Council (AH/R001197/1). I am grateful to the council for
      funding and to my colleagues on the project, Dr. Cassian Osborne-Carey and
      Dr. Robert Topinka.                                    
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      Alan Finlayson https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3939-349X   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    185     
                                                             
        Notes                                                
                                                             
        1. OnSpencerseeBar-On(2019);for‘metapolitics’seeBenoistandChampetier
          (2000)andforacritiqueseeMondon(2015).Europeansourcesfortheonline
          right include the mystical traditionalism of Evola (Sedgwick, 2004), the
          Identitarian movement (Willinger, 2013) and Russian traditionalist
          Aleksander Dugin (2012; see also Lyons, 2017; Orellana and Michelsen,
          2019).                                             
        2. See: https://vdare.com/about                      
        References                                           
        Aikin, Scott F. (2019) Deep disagreement, the Dark Enlightenment, and the
         rhetoric of the red pill. Journal of Applied Philosophy 36(3): 420–435.
        Andersson, Jenny (2010) The Library and the Workshop: Social Democracy and
         Capitalism in the Knowledge Age. Stanford: Stanford: University Press.
        Bar-On,Tamir(2019)RichardB.Spencerandthealtright.In:Sedgwick,Mark
         (ed.) Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to Liberal
         Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 224–242.
        Barbrook, Richard (2006) The Class of the New. London: OpenMute.
        Beckett, Andy (2020) Why Boris Johnson’s Tories fell for a tiny sect of liber-
         tarian provocateurs. The Guardian, 1 August. Available at: https://www.the-
         guardian.com/commentisfree/2020/aug/01/why-johnsons-tories-fell-for-a-
         tiny-sect-of-libertarian-provocateurs-rcp (accessed 28 July 2021).
        Bell, Daniel (1973) The Coming of Post-Industrial Society. New York: Basic
         Books.                                              
        Benoist,A.deandChampetier,C.(2000)ManifestooftheFrenchNewRightin
         the Year 2000. Telos 115: 117–144.                  
        Brown, Wendy (2005) Edgework. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
        Buckley, F.H. (2016) Trump vs the new class. American Conservatism, 2 May.
         Available at: https://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/trump-vs-
         the-new-class/ (accessed 28 July 2021).             
        Buckley, F.H. (2018) How Donald Trump dismantled the new class. American
         Spectator,29August.Availableat:https://spectatorworld.com/topic/donald-
         trump-dismantled-new-class/ (accessed 28 July 2021).
        Burgess, Jean and Matamoros-Ferna´ndez, Ariadna (2016) Mapping sociocul-
         tural controversies across digital media platforms: One week of #gamergate
         on Twitter, YouTube, and Tumblr. Communication Research and Practice
         2(1): 79–96.                                        
        Burnham, James (1964) Suicide of the West: An Essay on the Meaning and
         Destiny of Liberalism. New York: John Day Company.  
        Burrows, Roger (2018) Urban futures and the Dark Enlightenment: A brief
         guide for the perplexed. In: Jacobs, K. and Malpas, J. (eds) Towards a
         Philosophy of the City: Interdisciplinary and Transcultural Perspectives.
         Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.                 
        Carchedi, Guglielmo (1987) Class politics, class consciousness, and the new
         middle class. Insurgent Sociologist 14(3): 111–130. 
        Chambers,SamuelA.andFinlayson,Alan(2008)AnnCoulterandtheproblem
         of pluralism: From values to politics. Borderlands 7(1).

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      186                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Connolly, William E. (2005) The evangelical-capitalist resonance machine.
        Political Theory 33(6): 869–886.                     
      Dahl, Goran (1999) Radical Conservatism and the Future of Politics. London:
        SAGE.                                                
      Dardot, Pierre and Laval, Christian (2013) The New Way of the World: On
        Neoliberal Society. London: Verso.                   
      Dignam, Pierce Alexander and Rohlinger, Deana (2019) Misogynistic men
        online: How the red pill helped elect Trump. Signs 44(3): 589–612.
      Drolet, Jean-Franc¸ois and Williams, Michael C. (2020) America First:
        Paleoconservatism and the ideological struggle for the American right.
        Journal of Political Ideologies 25(1): 28–50.        
      Dugin, Aleksander (2012) The Fourth Political Theory. Arktos Media.
      Epoch Times (2017) Jordan Peterson exposes the postmodernist agenda (part 1
        of7),3July.Availableat:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼PkNzYttjSHE
        (accessed 18 January 2021).                          
      Fielitz, Maik and Thurston, Nick (eds) (2019) Post-Digital Cultures of the Far
        Right. Bielefeld: Transcript.                        
      Finlayson,Alan(2020)YouTubeandpoliticalideologies:Technology,populism
        and rhetorical form. Political Studies. DOI: 10.1177%2F0032321720934630.
      Foucault, Michel (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
      Francis,SamuelT.(2014)EssentialWritingsonRace.NewCenturyFoundation.
      Freeden, Michael (1998) Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual
        Approach. Oxford: Clarendon.                         
      Freeden, Michael (2013) The morphological analysis of ideologies. In: Freeden,
        MichaelSargent,Tower,LymanandStears,Marc(eds)TheOxfordHandbook
        of Political Ideologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 115–137.
      Ging,Debbie(2017)Alphas,betasandincels:Theorizingthemasculinitiesofthe
        manosphere. Men and Masculinities 22(4): 638–657.    
      Gottfried, Paul (1999) After Liberalism: Mass Democracy in the Managerial
        State. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.    
      Gouldner,Alvin(1979)TheFutureofIntellectualsandtheRiseoftheNewClass.
        London: Macmillan.                                   
      Hartzell, Stephanie (2018) Alt-white: Conceptualizing the ‘alt-right’ as a rhet-
        orical bridge between white nationalism and mainstream public discourse.
        Journal of Contemporary Rhetoric 8(1/2): 6–25.       
      Hawley, George (2017) Making Sense of the Alt-Right. New York: Columbia
        University Press.                                    
      Hine, Gabriel Emile, Onaolapo, Jeremigh, De Cristofaro, Emiliano, Kourtellis,
        Nicolas Leontiadis, Ilias, Riginos Samaras, Gianluca Stringhini and
        Blackburn, Jeremy (2017) Kek, cucks, and God Emperor Trump: A meas-
        urement study of 4chan’s politically incorrect forum and its effects on the
        web. arXiv.org. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.03452 (accessed 18
        January 2021).                                       
      Jamin,Jerome(2014)CulturalMarxismandtheradicalright.In:Jackson,Paul
        and Shekhovtsov, Anton (eds) The Post-War Anglo-American Far Right: A
        Special Relationship of Hate. London: Palgrave.      
      Kitschelt, Herbert and Rehm, Philipp (2014) Occupations as a site of political
        preference formation. Comparative Political Studies 47(12): 1670–1706.

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    187     
                                                             
        Kristol, Irving (1977) Memoirs of a Trotskyist. New York Times, 23 January.
         Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/1977/01/23/archives/memoirs-of-a-
         trotskyist-memoirs.html (accessed 28 July 2021).    
        Kristol, Irving (1978) Two Cheers for Capitalism. New York: Basic Books.
        Lewis,Rebecca(2018)AlternativeInfluence:BroadcastingtheReactionaryRight
         on YouTube. New York: Data & Society.               
        Lowndes,Joseph(2017)Fromnewclasscritiquetowhitenationalism:Telos,the
         alt right, and the origins of Trumpism. Konturen 9. 
        Lyons, Matthew N. (2017) Ctrl-Alt-Delete: The Origins and Ideology of the
         Alternative Right. Somerville, MA: Political Research Associates. Available
         at:https://www.politicalresearch.org/2017/01/20/ctrl-alt-delete-report-on-the-
         alternative-right (accessed 18 January 2021).       
        Lyons, Matthew N. (2019) Jack Donovan and male tribalism. In: Sedgwick,
         Mark (ed.) Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to
         Liberal Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
        Manavis, Sarah (2019) What is cultural Marxism? The alt-right meme in Suella
         Braverman’sspeechinWestminster.NewStatesman,26March.Availableat:
         https://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2019/03/what-cultural-
         marxism-alt-right-meme-suella-bravermans-speech-westminster (accessed 28
         July 2021).                                         
        Massanari,Adrienne(2017)GamergateandTheFappening:HowReddit’salgo-
         rithm, governance, and culture support toxic technocultures. New Media &
         Society 19(3): 329–346.                             
        Massanari,AdrienneandChess,Shira(2018)Attackofthe50-footsocialjustice
         warrior: The discursive construction of SJW memes as the monstrous femin-
         ine. Feminist Media Studies 18(4): 525–542.         
        McNay, Lois (2009) Self as enterprise: Dilemmas of control and
         resistance in Foucault’s The Birth of Biopolitics. Theory, Culture & Society
         26(6): 55–77.                                       
        Mihailidis, Paul and Viotty, Samantha (2017) Spreadable spectacle in digital
         culture: Civic expression, fake news, and the role of media literacies in
         ‘post-fact’ society. American Behavioral Scientist 61(4): 441–454.
        Moffitt, Benjamin (2016) The Global Rise of Populism: Performance, Political
         Style, and Representation. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
        Mondon, Aurelien (2015) The French secular hypocrisy: The extreme right, the
         Republic and the battle for hegemony. Patterns of Prejudice 49(4): 392–413.
        Munger,KevinandPhillips,Joseph(2019)Asupplyanddemandframeworkfor
         YouTube politics. Available at: https://osf.io/73jys/ (accessed 18 January
         2021).                                              
        Murray, Douglas (2019) The Madness of Crowds: Gender, Race and Identity.
         London: Bloomsbury.                                 
        Nagle, Angela (2017) Kill All Normies: Online Culture Wars from 4chan and
         Tumblr to Trump and the Radical Right. London: Zero Books.
        Neiwert, David (2017) Alt-America: The Rise of the Radical Right in the Age of
         Trump. London: Verso.                               
        Nieli, Russell (2019) Jared Taylor and white identity. In: Sedgwick, Mark (ed.)
         Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to Liberal
         Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 137–153.

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      188                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Orellano, Pablo de and Michelsen, Nicholas (2019) Reactionary
        Internationalism: The philosophy of the New Right. Review of International
        Studies 45(5): 748–767.                              
      Palkin, Steve (2016) Genders, rights and freedom of speech. The Agenda with
        Steve Palkin. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼kasiov0ytEc
        (accessed 18 January 2021).                          
      Papacharissi, Zizi (2016) Affective publics and structures of storytelling:
        Sentiment, events and mediality. Information, Communication & Society
        19(3): 307–324.                                      
      Peterson, Jordan (2017) Identity politics and the Marxist lie of white privilege.
        YouTube, 13 November. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
        v¼PfH8IG7Awk0 (accessed 28 July 2021).               
      Peterson, Jordan (2018) To junior high, high school students and their parents.
        YouTube, 2 January. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
        v¼s0EuQe6BOWo (accessed 18 January 2021).            
      Phelan, Sean (2019) Neoliberalism, the far right, and the disparaging of ‘Social
        Justice Warriors’. Communication, Culture and Critique 12(4): 455–475.
      Phillips, Whitney (2016) This Is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things: Mapping the
        Relationship between Online Trolling and Mainstream Culture. Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.                                       
      Raventos, Jorge (2002) From the new left to postmodern populism: An inter-
        view with Paul Piccone. Telos 122: 133–152.          
      Ribeiro, Manoel Horta, Otton, Raphael, West, Robert, Almeida, Virgilio and
        Wagner, Meira (2019) Auditing radicalization pathways on YouTube.
        arXiv.org. Available at: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.08313.pdf (accessed 28
        July 2021).                                          
      Richardson, John E. (2015) ‘Cultural Marxism’ and the British National Party:
        A transnational discourse. In: Copsey, Nigel and Richardson, John E (eds)
        Cultures of Post-War British Fascism. London: Routledge.
      Robin, Corey (2018) The Reactionary Mind: Conservatism from Edmund Burke
        to Donald Trump. Oxford: Oxford University Press.    
      Ross, George (1978) Marxism and the new middle classes: French critiques.
        Theory and Society 5(2): 163–190 .                   
      Rothbard, Murray (1992) Right-wing populism. LewRockwell.Com. Available
        at: https://web.archive.org/web/20160215192334/http://archive.lewrockwell.
        com/rothbard/ir/Ch5.html (accessed 18 January 2021). 
      Salazar,Pierre-Joseph(2018)Thealt-rightasacommunityofdiscourse.Javnost
        – The Public 25(1–2): 135–143.                       
      Salter, Michael (2018) From geek masculinity to Gamergate: The technological
        rationality of online abuse. Crime, Media, Culture 14(2): 247–264.
      Schradie, Jen (2019) The Revolution that Wasn’t: How Digital Activism Favors
        Conservatives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Sedgwick,Mark(2004)AgainsttheModernWorld:TraditionalismandtheSecret
        Intellectual History of the Twentieth Century. Oxford: Oxford University
        Press.                                               
      Sedgwick,Mark(ed.)(2019)KeyThinkersoftheRadicalRight:BehindtheNew
        Threat to Liberal Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Finlayson                                    189     
                                                             
        Slobodian, Quinn (2018) Neoliberalism’s populist bastards. Public Seminar, 15
         February. Available at: http://www.publicseminar.org/2018/02/neoliberal-
         isms-populist-bastards/ (accessed 18 January 2021). 
        Slobodian, Quinn (2019) Anti-68ers and the racist-libertarian alliance: How a
         schism among Austrian School neoliberals helped spawn the alt right.
         Cultural Politics 15(3): 372–386.                   
        Streeck, Wolfgang (2017) The return of the repressed. New Left Review 104:
         5–18.                                               
        Taguieff, Pierre-Andre (1993) From race to culture: The new right’s view of
         European identity. Telos 98–99: 99–125.             
        Tait, Joshua (2019) Mencius Moldbug and the reactionary Enlightenment. In:
         Sedgwick, Mark (ed.) Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New
         Threat to Liberal Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 137–153.
        Taylor, Jared (2011) White Identity: Racial Consciousness in the 21st Century.
         New Century Foundation.                             
        Topinka,Robert(2018)Politicallyincorrectparticipatorymedia:Racistnation-
         alism on r/ImGoingToHellForThis. New Media & Society 20(5): 2050–2069.
        Topinka, Robert (forthcoming) The politics of anti-discourse: Copypasta, the
         Alt-Right, and the rhetoric of form. Theory & Event.
        Touraine,Alain(1971)ThePost-IndustrialSociety.NewYork:RandomHouse.
        Tuters, Marc and Hagen, Sal (2020) (((They))) rule: Memetic antagonism and
         nebulous othering on 4chan. New Media & Society 22(12): 2218–2237.
        Tuters,Marc,Jokubauskaite_,EmilijaandBach,Daniel(2018)Post-truthprotest:
         How 4chan cooked up the Pizzagate bullshit. M/C Journal 21(3).
        Van Valkenburgh, Shawn P (2021) Digesting the red pill: Masculinity and neo-
         liberalism in the manosphere. Men and Masculinities 24(1): 84–103.
        Walker, Peter (2019) Tory MP criticised for using antisemitic term ‘cultural
         Marxism’. The Guardian, 26 March. Available at: https://www.theguardian.
         com/news/2019/mar/26/tory-mp-criticised-for-using-antisemitic-term-cul-
         tural-marxism (accessed 28 July 2021).              
        Watson, P (2015a) Absolute Proof Liberalism Is a Mental Disorder, 14 May.
         Available at: https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=YZL3axcwDz8 (accessed
         9 August 2021).                                     
        Watson, P (2015b) Why Are Feminists Fat & Ugly, 3 August. Available at:
         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PwYN7l–3oY (accessed 9 August
         2021).                                              
        Weber,Max(1978)MaxWeber,EconomyandSociety,edsRoth,Guentherand
         Wittich, Claus. Berkeley: University of California Press.
        Weiss, Bari (2018) Meet the renegades of the Intellectual Dark Web. The New
         YorkTimes,8May.Availableat:https://www.nytimes.com/2018/05/08/opin-
         ion/intellectual-dark-web.html (accessed 28 July 2021).
        Willinger, Markus (2013) Generation Identity. Arktos Media.
        Woltermann, Chris (1993) What is paleoconservatism? Telos 97: 9–20.
        Zeeuw, Daniel de and Tuters, Marc (2020) The internet is serious business: On
         thedeepvernacularweb anditsdiscontents.Cultural Politics16(2):214–232.
        AlanFinlaysonisProfessorofPolitical&SocialTheoryattheUniversity
        of East Anglia. From 2018–21 he was Principal Investigator on

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      190                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      the research project ‘Political Ideology, Rhetoric and Aesthetics in the
      Twenty-First Century: The Case of the ‘‘Alt-Right’’’, funded by the UK
      Arts and Humanities Research Council. From 2020–22 he is Co-
      Investigator on the research project ‘Our Subversive Voice? The
      History and Politics of English Protest Music’, also funded by the
      AHRC.                                                  
                                                             
      This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘Post-
      Neoliberalism?’, edited by William Davies and Nicholas Gane.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             