[PAGE 1]
 1334367                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251334367Theory, Culture & SocietyFolkers
                                                             
                                                             
       Special Issue: Planetary Property                     
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Future Theft: Fossil                          1 –19   
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Capitalization, Ecological                            
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Dispossession, and Climate         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153133344336677
       Reparations                         journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
                                                             
       Andreas Folkers                                       
       Institute for Social Research, Frankfurt              
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article criticizes the way fossil capitalization dispossesses the future. Turning
       fossil fuel into capital entails the legal enclosure, calculative cheapening, and material
       extraction/pollution of the future. Fossil investors’ ‘present values’ hinge on the misery
       of those dispossessed by climate emergencies. Fossil capitalization is premised on ‘future
       theft’ understood as a temporally inverted form of ‘original accumulation’. The durability
       of inequality created by asset wealth is compounded by the durability of carbon waste.
       Climate economics legitimizes and entrenches this pattern by discounting the future
       and failing to assign responsibilities for climate costs. Tort litigations allow climate
       victims to sue fossil fuel companies for compensation. However, they remain limited by
       the strictures of liberal property law. Climate reparations promise to overcome these
       limits by reclaiming the stolen future without recourse to previously settled property
       rights. Still, they cannot escape the vicious tempo-material trajectories engendered by
       fossil assets and their carbon afterlives.            
       Keywords                                              
       assets, capitalism, climate class, climate justice, climate law, critical theory, property
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
                                                             
       The climate movement has changed the political status of the future. The future no longer
       serves, as it did in postwar Western welfare states, as an inexhaustible resource to tame
       distributional conflicts between labor and capital by promising workers that they and
       their children will be better off tomorrow. The future has become a scarce resource. It has
       changed from a means to resolve into the very source of distributional conflicts. Rival
       parties stake a claim on it as evidenced by accusations of ‘future theft’ articulated by the
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Andreas Folkers. Email: A.folkers@em.uni-frankfurt.de
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      2                                  Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      climate movement: ‘You are stealing our future in front of our eyes’, the 15-year-old
      Greta Thunberg hurled at the politicians at the 24th Conference of the Parties (COP24)
      in Katowice. The climate movement’s grievance over future theft resonates with cri-
      tiques of how financial capitalism appropriates time and ‘extracts revenue from the
      future’ (Mitchell, 2020: 53). Financial capital – whether in the form of a direct invest-
      ment, equity, or credit – is premised on revenue it generates in the future – dividends,
      rents, and interest payments. Because of the workings of interest rates and the peculiari-
      ties of financial valuation (Doganova, 2024), investors and lenders get future revenues at
      a ‘discount’. The difference between present and future value underpins their profits.
      Capital is not just premised on cheap labor and cheap nature (Moore, 2015), but also on
      a cheap future.                                        
        This article introduces the notion of future theft that brings together and extends eco-
      nomic and ecological critiques of intertemporal dispossession. It goes where both con-
      cerns meet: fossil capitalization understood as the way fossil fuels become and operate
      as capital. Here finance’s exploitative relation to the future finds its most devastating but
      also most glaring expression. Fossil assets not only discount but dispossess the future
      because they call forth climate damages occurring long after they have exhausted their
      lifetime. This undermines the common justification for the devaluation of the future and
      the virtue of private property and investment more generally, namely that it makes the
      future richer. It makes the critique of capital’s future extraction more salient. In turn, this
      focus shifts the attention of climate critique from climate summits to the fossil economy,
      from international treaties to property law, from the atmospheric climate ‘imperium’ to
      the subterranean ‘dominium’ over fossil fuels.         
        I elaborate my notion of future theft against alternative framings that conceptualize
      climate theft differently or deny its existence altogether. For Thunberg – and large parts
      of the Euro-American climate movement – the struggle over the future is an intergenera-
      tional conflict between grown-ups and children, boomers and gen zetters, present and
      future generations. Climate economists would respond that there is no theft if the costs
      for climate mitigation and the benefits of averted damages are balanced efficiently. As I
      will show, this view legitimizes, entrenches and extends future theft. In contrast, the
      focus on fossil capitalization shifts attention to the exploitative and dispossessive inter-
      temporal but not simply intergenerational relationship between owners of fossil fuel
      assets and those affected by climate damages. Inspired by Marxist class analysis that
      focusses on social asymmetries mediated by property in which the wealth of one party
      systematically depends on the misery of others, I argue that fossil asset owners claim
      future revenues in the present that others must pay for – economically and ecologically
      – in the future. Fossil assets mediate socio-ecological ‘class’ relations, not only as a
      means of production and ‘durable wealth’ (Beckert, 2022) accumulation but also as a
      means of climate destruction and durable carbon waste accumulation. I show how this
      exacerbates inequalities in the neoliberal ‘asset economy’ (Adkins et al., 2020).
        However, this relationship does not translate easily into the kind of political antago-
      nism Marxist notions of class struggle suggest. Fossil fuels belong to petro-states – many
      in the Global South, some rich, some very poor – and have historically enabled the wealth
      of western industrialized countries. In the age of intense financial intermediation, fossil
      assets are not just in the hands of a few Rockefellers but also in investment portfolios of

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        3      
                                                             
       workers’ pension funds. Similarly, victims of future theft seem to be everywhere and
       nowhere. Everywhere because everyone is potentially affected by climate emergencies.
       Nowhere, because the stolen future, it seems, has yet to arrive. To counter this delusive
       elusiveness, and to give a sense of what kind of political tremors might emerge along the
       faultline between fossil owners and climate victims, I zero in on a climate tort in which a
       Peruvian farmer sues a German energy company for climate damages. Beyond the cast of
       actors, the case is highly suggestive because it reveals that climate damages have already
       arrived in the present. The case addresses future theft in a reparative and not simply pre-
       ventative mode. It is not just about protecting ‘future generations’ but about compensating
       climate victims now. This prompts me to ask if and how climate reparations can redeem
       future theft understood as a historical injustice that has never ended but stretches into the
       future.                                               
        By mobilizing and extending approaches from valuation studies (Birch and Muniesa,
       2020; Doganova, 2024; Muniesa et al., 2017) and critical political economy (Mitchell,
       2020; Nitzan and Bichler, 2009), the article sets out to illuminate the dispossessive logic
       of fossil capitalization as a form of a future theft understood as a temporally inverted
       ‘original accumulation’ (Marx, 2024 [1867]: 650–92). I then show how hegemonic cli-
       mate economics repeats the appropriative tendencies inscribed in fossil capitalization.
       Climate economics devalues the future by discounting climate costs and relies on acts of
       ‘air-appropriation’ (Folkers, 2020), in which appropriation proceeds through pollution
       (Serres, 2010). I then turn to climate jurisprudence and show how torts mobilize the
       matrix of responsibility inscribed into liberal notions of property. While climate torts are
       illuminating because they can stage a confrontation between fossil asset owners and cli-
       mate victims, their political value remains limited due to the strictures of liberal property
       law. I will therefore probe if and how climate reparations (Burkett, 2009; Táíwò, 2022) go
       beyond these limits.                                  
       Fossil Capitalization: Accumulation by Future         
       Dispossession                                         
       This section shows how fossil fuels have become an asset through three operations of capi-
       talization – legal, calculative, and material – each of which appropriates the future in a par-
       ticular way. I will go beyond existing capitalization approaches by showing what happens
       after fossil fuels have exhausted their lifetime as an economic asset and become ecological
       liabilities. I thus maintain that it matters what matter gets capitalized, because the contingent
       and contradictory conjuncture between capitalist temporalities and the material temporality
       of fossil fuels and their residuals (Folkers, 2021) engenders ‘future theft’.
       Preemption: The Legal Enclosure of the Future         
                                                             
       In most countries the national state acts a as ‘property-owning unit’ (Coronil, 1997: 50)
       of fossil fuels (Asdal and Lahn, 2024; Bridge and Le Billon, 2017: 27). States often
       exploit their reserves in cooperation with oil and gas companies. There are countless
       juridical techniques through which companies gain access to gas, coal, and oil reserves.
       However, there are two basic forms: concessions and contracts (Christophers, 2020: 99).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                                  Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      The concession, prevalent in the first part of the 20th century, engendered ‘a colonial
      extraction regime in which the state grants private companies ownership of the subsoil’
      (Appel, 2019: 141). Through the concession, the imperium of oil states is literally and
      symbolically undermined by the dominium of private companies. The juridical perfora-
      tion of the territory goes along with the physical drilling of wells.
        The introduction of contractual models in which the state always remains the owner
      of the resource changes the appropriation regime. In Production Service Agreements, for
      example, states and companies negotiate how to share the future profits from oil or gas
      projects (Appel, 2019: 137–71; Radon, 2007). The territorial appropriation of the subsoil
      gives way to a temporal regime of appropriation (on temporal appropriation see
      Doganova, 2024: 247–8). The companies no longer own the oil in the ground. Rather, in
      return for their investments, they can claim their share of the future cash flows it gener-
      ates. They don’t own fossil fuels but become shareholders of fossil assets. To secure
      these claims, investors mobilize legal tools to secure ‘the life span of their assets’ (Pistor,
      2019: 14). In the fossil fuel industry this ranges from ‘stability clauses’ in extraction
      contracts to international investment treaties that prevent states from adopting stricter
      social or environmental legislation (Dehm, 2023: 270–1; Radon, 2007). Taken together,
      these legal tools enclose the future. Like the enclosure of land, this involves not only
      fencing in a given terrain but making available a future that is ‘open for business’ exclu-
      sively. This requires draining the swamps of democratic visions, revolutionary hopes,
      and concerns over coming generations, to bulldoze the ‘deep future’ of planetary time-
      scales, to clear it from the material entanglements that connect past, present, and future.
      It creates a capitalist revenue horizon: a flat temporal domain that becomes calculable in
      terms of abstract monetary units. The temporal landscape created for fossil investors
      forecloses the democratic promise of collective future making.
        Property law has always come with the powers of ‘time binding’ (Luhmann, 1993).
      Already Jeremy Bentham broke with the Lockean notion of property as an effect of past
      labor to construe it as a legal claim on the future: ‘Law alone is able to create a fixed and
      durable possession [. . .]. Law alone can accustom men to bow their heads under the
      yoke of foresight’ (Bentham, 1978: 50). The state-secured durable claim on property
      both protects and produces the investment horizon. The security of property is the foun-
      dation of economic expectations, the fundamental act of sovereign ‘de-risking’ that pro-
      vides the bedrock on which the ever more baroque cathedrals of financial risk and
      revenue calculations can settle. However, the trajectory from property to expectation can
      also be reversed. As investment treaties and extraction contracts protect future revenue,
      they create a quasi-property right of the thin air of future expectations. They legally
      hedge the appropriation of the monetary future that has already taken place. Investment
      becomes a form of ‘preemption’1 in which law subsequently protects a claim on a future
      finance that has already been seized.                  
      Discounting: The Calculative Cheapening of the Future  
      For oil and gas companies, knowing the value of assets is crucial to decide which oil and
      gas fields are worth investing in. The standard calculative format for this is the internal
      rate of return (Field, 2022) – a calculative device of the discounted cash flow (DCF) fam-
      ily that allows them to easily compare the viability of different investment opportunities.
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        5      
                                                             
       The basic assumption in DCF is that the present value of an asset is the sum of the expected
       future monetary returns (Muniesa et al., 2017). In the fossil fuel industry, the selling of
       coal, oil, and gas generates this income so that the geological prospection of the subsur-
       face and the economic prospection of future market prices determine present value.
        Yet the present value of assets depends on one further factor: the discount rate (Doganova,
       2024). Expected returns are discounted according to a previously determined ‘rate’.
       Justifications of discounting usually invoke the idea that investors deserve a reward for the
       risks they take and for not consuming their wealth in the present. Thanks to their risk and
       restraint – the reasoning goes – the future becomes investible and more prosperous. Yet the
       effects of discounting suggest the opposite. Discounting cheapens the future. It makes an
       asset much cheaper in the present than it promises to be in the future. With a 5% discount
       rate, a cash flow of 100 euros a year from now is only worth 95.24 euros. The discount rate
       expresses the rate of return and allows investors to cash in the difference between their
       present investments and their future revenue. Accordingly, discounting, as Timothy
       Mitchell (2020: 53) argues, ‘extracts revenue from the future’. Jason Moore (2015: 147)
       has argued that fossil fuels are ‘cheap energy’ because their extraction ‘appropriates’ unpaid
       biospheric work/energy. However, for the investor the value of fossil assets does not derive
       so much from past work as from future expectations. Cheap fossil energy is not only prem-
       ised on cheap nature but also on a discounted, cheap future. Discounting also limits the
       temporal horizon relevant to investors. As the value of future cash flows shrinks every year,
       far-future returns matter little for the present value of an asset. After a ‘forecast period’ of
       usually 10 years, the ‘terminal value’ just lumps together the residual value of the future in
       a single number. Discounting carves out a near future horizon of revenue expectation and
       abstracts from the much longer future that fossil capitalization sets in motion.
        As Liliana Doganova (2024: 10) observes, the discount rate is an inverse interest rate.
       However, both investments and debts place a ‘burden of repayment’ (Mitchell, 2024) on
       the future. Tenants must repay real estate investors’ revenue expectations with rising
       rents. Patients must repay pharmaceutical companies’ ‘cost of capital’ with high drug
       prices (Doganova, 2024: 210f.). In the case of the fossil fuel industry this burden initially
       falls on extractive workers and energy consumers. To meet revenue expectations, wages
       must comply with estimated production costs and prices need to remain high. Historically,
       oil companies and petrostates have repeatedly curtailed their output to increase the oil
       price (Mitchell, 2011: 163). The strategic disruption of fossil fuel supplies in geopolitical
       conflicts has, for example, caused prices to rise and fossil asset values to appreciate.
        With Thorstein Veblen one may criticize such practices as ‘sabotage’. For him, the
       ‘larger meaning of the Security of Property’ is that ‘[o]wnership confers a legal right of
       sabotage’ (Veblen, 1997: 66f.) by wasting the potential to increase material wealth in
       favor of pecuniary returns. However, in times of climate emergency, the problem is not
       so much that fossil fuel companies hold back their resources but that they sell them – not
       that they waste their resources but that they waste, or pollute, the atmosphere. To avoid
       their assets from becoming ‘stranded’, thus losing some or all of their value, fossil com-
       panies must sell amounts of fuel bound to cause disastrous degrees of global heating
       (Folkers, 2024). Sabotage becomes ecotage. The security of the fossil asset confers a
       legal right to abuse nature. Such acts of ecotage place a hitherto unimaginable economic
       and ecological ‘burden of repayment’ on the future.   

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                                  Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      Extraction/Pollution: The Material Dispossession of the Future
      The capitalized future is not ‘just’ calculative or ‘fictive’. It has all too real effects. After
      purging, enclosing, limiting, molding, and cheapening the future through a complex
      legal-economic apparatus, capitalization requires oil and gas companies to materialize
      the future they have already claimed. For the calculative future to become ‘true’, capitali-
      zation must set in motion a trajectory in which revenue expectations hold up. It needs to
      produce a future that recursively solidifies the material ground for the preceding legal-
      economic appropriation – it must make up a world in which its calculative formalizations
      gain traction. In the fossil fuel industry this means funding extractive projects and build-
      ing infrastructures that materially underpin the revenue claims on the future.
        Mediated by technology, capital becomes a terraforming force. As the extraction of
      fossil fuels has become ever more capital intensive, the investors’ return expectations
      became a crucial factor in disclosing exploitable resources. When investors can expect
      revenues that make ever bigger capital expenditures worthwhile, they can fund more
      expensive extractive infrastructures to recover previously unavailable reserves. The
      financial future decides the extractability of geo-historical reserves. It thus seems as if
      the resources exist only by virtue of their capitalization. Marx (2024 [1867]: 129) already
      observed that capital becomes its own recursive cause when the offspring start to pro-
      duce their own parents. This also goes for the co-production of fuels and capital in fossil
      capitalization: fossil fuels create the value of capital, but capital creates fossils as extract-
      able fuels in the first place.                         
        Expressing the ontology of capital, oil and gas companies construe extraction as
      ‘production’ of fossil fuels. This echoes the colonial ideology of ‘improvement’ that
      sought to legitimize the appropriation of indigenous land. In his theory of property, John
      Locke (1982 [1689]) famously argued that turning ‘common’ land into private property
      is justified if its owner cultivates and thus improves it through labor. Fossil corpora-
      tions’ understanding of oil and gas ‘production’ reproduces this trope but, tellingly,
      removes labor from the equation. For them it is capital’s ‘seed funding’ that allows us
      to harvest fuels deemed unextractable before. Fossil capitalization seems to increase
      ‘the common [fossil] stock’ (Locke, 1982 [1689]: 294) of mankind by turning it into an
      asset and thus enriching the future. While the idea of fossil fuel ‘production’ pretends to
      salvage underground resources from being ‘wasted’, it in fact engenders two kinds of
      ‘wasting’: extraction and pollution. Recovering and using fossil fuels irreversibly
      wastes the stock of available energy on the planet. It does not ‘add’ something to nature
      but instead subtracts it. More importantly, the fossil industry is wasteful because it pol-
      lutes the atmosphere with CO emissions. As the energy source of industrialization,
                       2                                     
      fossil fuels have become one of the biggest sources of production. However, they are
      also the biggest source of pollution and destruction. The double waste they engender
      undermines the logic of productive appropriation, the link between labor/production
      and property/prosperity that informed the moral economies of proponents and critics of
      liberal ownership regimes from Locke to Marx.          
        This constitutes the unique role of fossil capitalization. Like other assets wrought
      from the earth, it appropriates nature. Like other forms of capitalization, it relies on a
      cheap discounted future. But fossil assets come with an economic and ecological

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        7      
                                                             
       surcharge on the planetary future. Fossil values – claimed in the present and ‘extracted’
       from the future – not only rely on paybacks from extraction workers and energy consum-
       ers. The carbon waste they produce demands payback in the form of biospheric work of
       carbon sequestration. The climatic changes they trigger require adaptation work that is
       mostly unpaid or underpaid (Johnson et al., 2023). Finally, the ecological destruction
       global heating causes is already responsible for enormous waves of dispossession rang-
       ing from damaged homes and deteriorating property values to the disappearance of
       whole islands, coastal regions and the uninhabitability of ever larger parts of the planet.
       The creation of fossil assets does not improve but rather impoverishes ‘the future’ – or,
       to be more precise, the future revenues fossil assets generate for investors tacitly rely on
       the burdens of those affected by climate damages.     
        Fossil capitalization relies on a temporally inverted form of what Marx (2024 [1867]:
       650–92) called ‘original accumulation’. Marx famously argued that capitalism is borne
       out of a violent process of expropriation that created the conditions for exploitation – the
       separation of workers from the means of production. Critical theorists have extended
       Marx’s concept, emphasizing that large scale expropriation is not a single event but a
       recurring feature of capitalism (Harvey, 2014). This characterizes fossil capitalization, as
       extractive projects are often accompanied by massive forms of dispossession, especially
       of indigenous lands (Watts, 2012). However, future theft entails a further twist. In fossil
       capitalization dispossession not just precedes accumulation but also follows it. Since
       present fossil asset values are premised on future climate emergencies, fossil accumula-
       tion delays dispossession and defers it into the future and to places often far removed
       from the sites of extraction and combustion. If, as Marx (2024 [1867]: 651) maintained,
       the original accumulation is the ‘prehistory’ of capitalism, ecological dispossession is its
       posthistory. Nevertheless, future theft is no less constitutive than past expropriations
       because fossil assets are only valuable because they discount and disavow their constitu-
       tive future violence.                                 
        Whereas Marx (2024 [1867]: 682) saw expropriative state violence as the ‘hothouse’
       breeding capital, fossil capitalization delegates dispossession to a seemingly natural
       agent: the slow violence of fossil residuals (Folkers, 2021) that create a hothouse earth
       breeding storms and droughts, fires and floods. These delays and delegations allow inves-
       tors to divest themselves from the destructive effects of their investments, to disown the
       liabilities of their assets. By limiting the relevant time horizon to the near future, discount-
       ing makes the deep climate future that fossil capitalization brings forth invisible. By
       cheapening and limiting the future, fossil capitalization engenders and hides ‘future theft’
       (Table 1).                                            
       Climate Economics: Capitalizing the Atmosphere,       
       Discounting the Future, Legitimizing Theft            
       Rosa Luxemburg (2015) has argued that capitalism relies on the constant appropriation
       of non-capitalistic milieus. Fossil capitalization also produces and relies on an outside;
       but it is not just spatial but also temporal. It introduces a financial asset life outlived by
       its ecological liabilities. Carbon emissions are the afterlife of past financial near futures
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                                  Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      Table 1. Operations of fossil capitalizations.         
      Mode    Legal            Calculative  Material         
      tools of concession, contract, DCF (discounted cash fossil fuel extraction
      appropriation investment treaties, arbitration flow) and combustion
                                                             
      type of future foreclosing alternative ways of cheapening/devaluing dispossession by
      theft   future making    the future   climate disaster 
                                                             
      and, at the same time, material operators of the planetary far future. With the growing
      awareness of the climate crisis, attempts to take the destructiveness of carbon emissions
      into account economically emerged. Climate economics and the political technologies
      they envision – carbon taxes and markets – seem to address the overshoot of fossil prop-
      erty as they seek to ‘internalize’ the ‘social cost of carbon’. At first glance this reverses
      the appropriative gesture of fossil capitalization. It does not exploit an outside but rather
      folds the outside in by ‘pricing externalities’. Yet, to do so the outside is made economi-
      cally digestible by turning the slow and fast violence of climate dispossession into a mere
      matter of ‘social cost’ (Coase, 1960). Like the appropriative acts discussed previously,
      internalization creates its own terrain by turning the scarred landscape of climate damage
      into a flat surface of cost.                           
        The inaugural act of climate economics is the seizure of its domain. It claims the
      atmosphere as a ‘common property of mankind’ (Edenhofer et al., 2013: 2). Unlike the
      fossil dominium, which is ruled by its private or state owners, the atmosphere, as a global
      common, can be brought under the rule of the climate imperium. But what allowed for
      and made necessary this becoming property of the atmosphere? Edenhofer et al. (2013:
      10) argue that the atmosphere is an asset whose net present value derives from the ‘cli-
      mate rent’ generated by selling pollution rights. This reasoning reveals the secret of how
      the atmosphere became property in the first place. The economic value of the atmos-
      phere, we learn, does not derive from its ecological capacity to create a balanced tem-
      perature but from its economic appropriation as a dumb space for carbon emissions.
        To subvert theories of productive appropriation according to which something
      becomes property by mixing it with work (Locke, 1982 [1689]: 288), Michel Serres
      (2010) introduced the concept of ‘appropriation through pollution’, according to which
      something becomes property by mixing it with waste. This does not only hold true for the
      curious cases Serres discusses, like spitting on food to claim it for yourself, but also for
      the way the atmosphere became ‘common property’ in and through its ecological wreck-
      age. The pollution of the atmosphere with CO emissions appropriated the atmosphere.
                                2                            
      In a logic reminiscent of that of preemption discussed above, the material act of pollutive
      ‘air-appropriation’ (Folkers, 2020) thus preceded the subsequent declaration of the dam-
      aged atmosphere as a global common. Only because of this pollutive seizure did it
      become possible for climate scientists to measure and map the atmosphere in terms of
      carbon molecules. In carbon budgeting the parts per million of carbon in the atmosphere
      indicate the ‘atmospheric capital’ (WBGU, 2009: 2), the dumb space left to pollute
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        9      
                                                             
       without exceeding certain temperature thresholds. This provides the calculative bedrock
       for the economic distribution of limited atmospheric pollution rights.
        Once established, this logic started to spill over to other earth spheres. The ‘cost of
       carbon’ is now the most prominent accounting unit to value the biosphere. In ‘natural
       capital’ accounting, trees, wetlands, even whales (Buller, 2022: 1) become valuable
       because they sequester carbon. Again, the calculative and legal work of turning nature
       into a carbon sink and thus a ‘carbon asset’ (Langley et al., 2021) depends on the preced-
       ing pollutive appropriation through the carbon residuals of fossil fuels. Atmospheric
       appropriation engenders biospheric appropriation. Pollution breeds property. It turns
       nature into capital. Pollution achieves what production could never do. It spawns a
       boundless über-appropriation that, while exceeding the limits of private property, does
       not end ownership per se. It rather turns the entire planet into property and assigns ‘man-
       kind’ as its owner.                                   
        The assigning of a property title to the atmosphere raised the question of how to ab/
       use it most efficiently. How to pollute it in a way that none of its waste disposal capacity
       is ‘wasted’, so left unexploited. This led to the search for an ‘optimal climate change’
       (Randalls, 2011) which the czar of climate economics, William Nordhaus, described as
       finding the sweet spot ‘between wrecking the economy and wrecking the world’
       (Nordhaus in Buller, 2022: 18). To identify the atmosphere’s ‘maximum sustainable
       yield’, climate economists conduct a cost-benefit analysis weighing the costs for decar-
       bonization against its benefit – the avoided costs of future climate damage. Long before
       ‘loss and damage’ became a prominent concern in climate politics, this analysis addressed
       the problem of climate destruction from an economic perspective. Since climate cost-
       benefit analyses are about an intertemporal distribution, they – like asset valuations – use
       discounting, which reduces the future costs of climate damages in relation to the current
       benefits of fossil fuel combustion. Climate economists usually justify this by the assump-
       tion that since ‘the future’ will be richer, it will be better equipped to deal with climate
       damages (Dasgupta, 2008). ‘We’ cannot curtail fossil growth too much now, because
       ‘our children’ will need it to be rich enough to deal with the fallout of this growth.
       Discounting once again cheapens the future, which lowers the ambition to fight climate
       change. In addition, discounting – again – limits the future to be taken into account. As
       Archer (2016) shows, each carbon molecule causes climate perturbations over one hun-
       dred thousand years on its long journey through the earth system. However, when trans-
       lating these damages into discounted cost, the future horizon shrinks to a few decades
       (Archer, 2016: 172). Discounting not only limits the lifetime of a fossil asset but also
       abstracts from its long carbon afterlife as ecological liability. Discounting underpins the
       fossil revenue horizon twice: by allowing investors to buy fossil assets cheaper in the
       present and by reducing the ‘social costs of carbon’, making it less likely that fossil
       assets are ‘stranded’ due to stricter climate regulation. High discount rates prevent cli-
       mate economics from preempting further future theft. If the full carbon cost of fossil
       assets would have to be considered in their valuation, they could have never been borne
       and fossil fuels never extracted.                     
        Yet, the logic of climate economics is flawed beyond discounting. It does not consider
       who will have to bear the actual costs of carbon and who is responsible for them. In fact,
       Ronald Coase (1960) introduced the concept of ‘social cost’ to dodge the legal

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                                 Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      problematic of liabilities for property damages caused by other properties – for example,
      one farmer’s cows trampling on another farmer’s cornfield. Instead of holding one party
      liable, one should assume a reciprocal relation of costs and benefits to be balanced in a
      way that increases the welfare of all involved parties. This displacement of legal respon-
      sibility in favor of economic efficiency casts its long shadow over the contemporary
      political economy of climate change. In hegemonic climate economics and politics there
      are no serious considerations to mobilize the revenues from ‘using’ the atmospheric asset
      to fund compensations for the damages of global heating. The neoliberal strategy to put
      a price on carbon was never about covering future costs but about sending price signals
      to steer market behaviour.                             
        Similarly, economic cost-benefit calculations only account for on an idealized future,
      not for the way the future will be burdened by the past. They only consider the remaining
      atmospheric assets in terms of carbon budgets, not the actual ecological liabilities of fos-
      sil fuels. The focus on the efficient use of atmospheric assets translated into a neat cli-
      mate goal has created a dangerous illusion: within the temperature limits, everything will
      be fine. Even though climate goals based on cost-benefit analysis explicitly acknowl-
      edge, and thus legitimize, damages below the temperature threshold, they do not come
      with meaningful consideration of how to deal with those damages. This becomes pain-
      fully obvious today as climate change is no longer just a threatening future but has
      become a hard felt present reality. We already inhabit the discounted future and must
      repay the climate debt at a steep interest. It’s payback time! We are doomed to carry the
      ‘yoke’ of yesterday’s foresight. We will very likely fail to reach our climate goals. But we
      must also concede that the climate goals have always already failed us. The present cli-
      mate damages which are still below what economists believed to be an ‘optimal climate
      change’ are already painful to most, devastating to many, unbearable to more and more.
      While the atmospheric assets are shrinking rapidly, we are left with fossil liabilities
      nobody seems to own but everyone must bear – in a common but highly unequal and
      discriminatory way.                                    
      Reclaiming the Stolen Future: From Climate Tort to     
      Reparation                                             
      Climate economics abstracts from the polarization of climate victims and perpetrators, of
      winners and losers in the ‘climate casino’ (Nordhaus, 2013). The accusation of future
      theft by the Euro-American climate movement challenges this framing by pointing out
      how discounting future ‘costs’ creates an intergenerational rupture. It delays climate
      action and disproportionally places climate costs on future generations. However, gen-
      erational framings tend to divert attention from other climate equity issues (Humphreys,
      2022). For decades climate justice advocates have stressed that high emissions in the
      North have contributed most to global heating whose effects will disproportionately fall
      on the South (Agarwal and Narain, 1991). In addition, a recent study by Chancel (2022)
      showed that the richest 10% of the world’s population emit almost four times more than
      the poorest 50%. Remarkably, the driving force behind this is the same that, according to
      Chancel’s long-time collaborator Thomas Piketty (2014), also explains rising economic
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        11     
                                                             
       inequality: asset wealth accumulation: ‘the bulk (70%) of emission from the global top
       1% comes from their investments rather than from their consumption. This appears to be
       due to the rise [. . .] in wealth inequality’ (Chancel, 2022: 934f.). It is, in other words, not
       so much how the 1% spend their money (e.g. on private jets) but how they make their
       money (as fossil investors). It’s fossil capital, not just carbon consumption. This under-
       lines the importance of focusing on the relation between fossil asset owners and climate
       victims as an intertemporal and not simply intergenerational relation. Therefore, in the
       next section I explore what socio-political tremors might emerge along this faultline. I
       analyse a climate tort that shows the potential as well as the limit of the liberal matrix of
       ownership for holding fossil capitalists accountable and then reflect on the (im)possibil-
       ity of just climate reparations.                      
       Climate Torts                                         
                                                             
       Hegel (1991: 73) conceptualized property as the ‘external sphere of freedom’ – the realm
       of possessed things through which the person’s free will receives an objective existence.
       Marx showed how this sphere tends to operate independently of willed subjects: as com-
       modity, property assumes a life of its own. Fossil assets extend and explode this ten-
       dency. They inflate the radius of their owner’s actions qua CO emissions into the deep
                                         2                   
       time of the earth system. This has legal ramifications. By extending their selves into
       possessed objects, the ‘absentee owners’ (Veblen, 1997) of fossil assets become poten-
       tially liable for the latter’s unruly actions, the spills and leaks of property. Property law
       provides a matrix to address these liabilities and equips propertied victims of damages
       with legal standing. That is why climate jurisprudence became a privileged site for cli-
       mate activists seeking to hold fossil companies responsible. In a current climate tort
       brought before a regional court in Germany, the Peruvian farmer Saúl Luciano Lliuya
       has sued the energy company RWE for climate damages (Bertram, 2022; Walker-
       Crawford, 2023). The case connects fossil asset owners and the ‘owners’ of climate costs
       across long spatio-temporal distances, crossing existing jurisdictions.
        Lliuya’s property is threatened by a glacier that is rapidly melting because of global
       heating. Models show that if part of the glacier should collapse into the glacial lagoon, a
       giant flood wave could destroy his village (Frey et al., 2018). What prevents the villagers
       from drowning is a dam and a drainage system. The plaintiffs therefore claim a contribu-
       tion by RWE for these resilience expenditures. The lawsuit is based on a passage in
       German property law which prohibits interference with another’s property. The clause
       usually applies to neighborhood disputes, regulating cases of nuisance between proxi-
       mate properties. By admitting the action to trial, however, the court recognized that cli-
       mate change brings about new planetary neighborhoods. The CO -saturated atmosphere
                                           2                 
       creates a new juridical topology in which distant places become proximate. Remarkably,
       the legal commentary to the law from 1899 already states:
        We live at the bottom of a sea of air. This [. . .] necessarily means that human action extends
        into the distance. [. . .] [O]ne must not only consider the relationship of neighbor to neighbor
        [. . .] the scope of the owner’s right can also be made to bear on all people.2
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                                 Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      The atmosphere becomes a medium for the spatial and temporal extension of fossil asset
      owners’ dominium. It allows them to ‘act’ on distant times and spaces. This constitutes
      their threatening power over the destiny of the planet but also explodes their legal
      liability.                                             
        The plaintiffs have assembled a cascade of expertise to knit together the casual chain
      connecting RWE and Lliuya. Hazard modelling shows that Lliuya’s property is threat-
      ened by the melting glacier (Frey et al., 2018). Climate attribution studies indicate that
      global heating is responsible for melting glaciers in the Andes (Stuart-Smith et al., 2021).
      Carbon accounting reveals the extent to which RWE is responsible for climate change.
      For the latter, the lawsuit draws on information by the Carbon Majors project, which
      compiles data on the historic CO emissions of the companies which together occupy
                         2                                   
      more than two-thirds of the atmospheric carbon dump (Heede, 2014). RWE has contrib-
      uted roughly 0.5% of carbon emissions, and therefore should, the plaintiffs argue, bear
      0.5% of the cost for flood protection, or $18,800. This form of carbon accounting turns
      CO emissions into forensic evidence. By linking historical emissions to present and
        2                                                    
      future damages, carbon forensics, unlike climate economics, does not present the atmos-
      phere as a finite dumping ground to be exploited as efficiently as possible. Rather it treats
      it as an archive: not as an almost depleted resource, but as a repository of fossil residuals
      that can be turned into indexes of historical injustice. Not as a ‘budget’ of remaining
      atmospheric capital but as a legal balance sheet where emissions enter on the liability
      side as carbon debt.                                   
        While the court case certainly provides an interesting scenario of how to deal with
      fossil liabilities, it offers little more than ‘environmental justice “light”’ (Bertram, 2022).
      Climate compensations based on individual court decisions will likely remain sporadic
      and require resources that victims often don’t have. German non-governmental organiza-
      tions funding the case have already invested much more in the court proceedings than the
      amount in dispute. And even if the case succeeds – which is questionable – it remains
      trapped by strictures of property law that can only reckon with property owners.
      Compensations in climate torts necessarily reproduce existing distributions of property
      and wealth. Climate damages in poorer countries are simply cheaper than those in the
      rich countries. Given the current distribution of wealth and power, it is not unlikely that
      wealthy owners of waterfront properties have a better chance to receive climate compen-
      sations than poor people who would need them most. Nor can torts offer compensations
      in cases in which clearly assigned property titles don’t exist. They therefore exclude
      everyone without existing property titles, ranging from the already dispossessed to all
      communities that don’t conform to Western understandings of property. Historically, this
      was the reason why slave owners and not the enslaved received compensation after the
      abolition of slavery. Nowadays, there is the real risk that a similar pattern will ensue.
      Should governments decide to prohibit further fossil extraction projects, the rules for
      calculating compensation in international investment treaties often guarantee investors
      reimbursement for forgone revenues of politically ‘stranded assets’ (Dehm, 2023). They
      would, in other words, receive compensation for merely expected profits and not only for
      past costs for extractive infrastructure. In contrast to the super-secured assets of fossil
      owners, victims of climate damages have no similar claim on the future. They could only

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        13     
                                                             
       claim compensation for actual costs or, in the absence of a legal claim on property, are
       excluded from compensation altogether.                
                                                             
       Climate Reparations                                   
       Recent calls for climate reparations (Burkett, 2009; Táíwò, 2022) promise to move the
       struggle for the repayment of ‘climate debt’ beyond individual compensation for prop-
       erty owners. Historically, reparations have been a vehicle to circumvent the problem that
       one can only receive compensation or a repayment of debt in the presence of established
       property claims, or contractual agreements. Reparations transcend the established legal
       system towards a more fundamental ‘right to have rights’. In this vein, climate repara-
       tions could create a legal standing of climate victims in the absence of a previously exist-
       ing property title. They could address ‘theft’ where that which has been stolen has never
       been formally owned.3                                 
        However, the problem of ‘future theft’ provides a significant challenge even for the
       way reparations have traditionally been conceived: addressing past historical injustices.
       Global heating clearly represents a historical injustice. But it is by no means a problem
       of the past but will only be aggravated in the future. Its wounds will not heal but be exac-
       erbated with time, because the accumulation of fossil capital not only relies on the past
       but also on future dispossessions. ‘Climate debt’ cannot be settled once and for all
       because it extends into the future with compound interest. Reparations traditionally
       entail the obligation of non-repetition and the elimination of the source of harm (Burkett,
       2009). Climate reparations thus imply fossil fuel abolition. However, since – once
       released in the atmosphere – CO will stay there for centuries and heat up the planet
                         2                                   
       further, climate change is nothing but the repetition of the past in the future. Global heat-
       ing intensifies and sustains other deep-rooted and similarly unfinished historical injus-
       tices. As Olúfẹ́miTáíwò (2022: 170f.) writes:         
        It is not that every aspect of today’s global racial empire is rooted in the impacts of climate
        change. But every aspect of tomorrow’s global racial empire will be. Climate change is set not
        just to redistribute social advantages, but to do so in a way that compounds and locks in the
        distributional injustices we’ve inherited from history.
        One of the most important contemporary engines for sustained distributional injus-
       tices, both in terms of race and class, is the neoliberal ‘asset economy’ (Adkins et al.,
       2020). It has widened the gap between rich and poor by making ownership the major
       source of wealth generation as returns on capital exceed growth in income from labor
       (Piketty, 2014). This has also made economic inequality more durable. In addition to the
       extension of asset lifetimes, a variety of legal, economic, and political techniques make
       it possible to transfer wealth over time, by either passing it to family members (Beckert,
       2022) or containing it in the corporation (Davies, 2020).4 With global heating the dura-
       bility and escalating dynamics of inequalities created by asset wealth accumulation will
       be compounded by the ecological durability of carbon waste accumulation. Wealthy fos-
       sil asset owners are in the unique position to make a net economic gain from climate
       change. Because they can transfer their capital over time at compound interest, they and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                                 Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      their heirs will likely be economically richer in a costly catastrophic climate future than
      in an alternative scenario in which their assets are stranded because of stricter climate
      regulation. For them it really is advantageous to discount future climate costs because
      they will likely be richer in the future that discounting engenders. Even though the top
      10% will – according to estimates by Chancel et al. (2023: 86) – suffer a relative income
      loss of 3% from climate damages, this will easily be compensated by a return on their
      investments which ranges between 7% and 9% among the top 1%. The bottom 50%, on
      the other hand, will have an income loss of 75%, which amounts to complete disposses-
      sion. The burden of repayment imposed by climate damages will likely resemble a gro-
      tesquely regressive tax on the future.                 
        The twin processes engendered by inherited economic wealth and inherited ecologi-
      cal waste make fossil asset owners the obvious target for climate reparation demands.
      They are not only disproportionally responsible for global heating. Their wealth is intrin-
      sically bound up with climate damages. As a ‘zombie form that outlives mortal humans’
      (Davies, 2020), the fossil corporation seems to be a particularly suitable target for such
      complex temporal claims, because it represents a non-human legal heir for the legacies
      of capital and carbon accumulation. However morally and economically justified, the
      political prospects of targeting fossil capitalists are limited. The ongoing-ness of the
      climate emergency not only deprives its victims of any sense of closure. Its costs will
      also likely overwhelm its perpetrators. All existing estimates indicate that the overall
      costs of future climate damages will exceed accumulated fossil revenues. Just imagine
      all the destroyed water pumps and infrastructure, lost harvests and drowned cities all
      over the world that RWE would have to pay 0.5% for – now and in the deep future. In the
      economy of planetary energy flows, the energetic ‘return’ of fossil fuels will far exceed
      the return of fossil capital. As Archer explains (2016: 174): ‘The bad global heating
      energy from burning a gallon of oil ultimately outweighs the good energy by a factor of
      about 40 million.’ All that which fossil capitalization discounted to secure ‘present val-
      ues’ is bound to return as unpayable debt with compound interest in the future. This
      implies that demands for climate reparations addressing fossil companies are doomed to
      fail. They can either only claim symbolic compensations or will bankrupt the source of
      compensations with more ambitious demands. While certainly morally satisfying, this
      would not help politically or economically.            
        Fossil capitalization inaugurates a tempo-materially mediated ‘class’ relation in which
      the exploiters/expropriators will probably have already disappeared before the exploited/
      expropriated have fully emerged – after all, the latter includes the not yet born. Fossil
      accumulation’s deferral of dispossessions into the future immunizes fossil asset owners
      against being held fully accountable. As much as climate reparation might strive to
      reclaim and redeem the stolen future, it comes up against the irreversibility of the mate-
      rial time of climate change and the contradiction between the finite life of the fossil asset
      and the virtual infinity of its carbon afterlives. In many ways this situation is extremely
      frustrating as the final day of reckoning will never arrive. The contemporary moment in
      which fossil asset owners and climate victims can have their literal and proverbial ‘day
      in court’ is just a blip in the deep time of the earth system – an important one, to be sure,
      not to be missed to claim as much payback as possible. 
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        15     
                                                             
        In the climate long run, however, when even the zombie fossil corporations will be
       dead, it will no longer be possible to fully reclaim the stolen future from its thieves.
       Rather, there is reason to fear that climate damages will eventually really become ‘social
       costs’ – but neither in an efficient Coasian nor in an equitable socialist sense. The best
       one could hope for would probably be something like a tax funded or subsidized climate
       insurance mechanism that socializes risks. The experience of the social insurance in the
       welfare state (Ewald, 2020) suggests that this might be much more effective in providing
       existential support to climate victims than fighting for compensation in court. Non-
       governmental organizations have long called for public climate insurance schemes to be
       partly funded by the revenue from carbon taxes which could – given the wealth-emission
       and poverty-vulnerability nexus – in fact be redistributive if designed appropriately
       (Richards and Boom, 2014). Still, the source of such tax revenues will – hopefully – dry
       out at the time when it would be needed most. In contrast to the welfare state counting on
       rising tax income due to economic growth, a future climate risk regime would have to
       cope with a diminishing carbon tax base. But even a just way to socialize climate cost
       could only offer financial compensation for losses that are often incommensurable. It
       cannot redeem existential injuries. It can compensate you for belongings but not the
       world you belong to.                                  
        These limits indicate the need to go beyond the logic of ‘social cost’ and capitalist
       ownership. For Marx (2024 [1867]: 791) the revolution was a reversal of the original
       accumulation, the reappropriation of what was stolen during the dispossessive beginning
       of capitalism. The ‘expropriators are expropriated’. This reappropriation was not simply
       restitutive. The revolution would also reappropriate the wealth generated through exploi-
       tation made possible by the original dispossession. However, the logic of capitalist pre-
       appropriation – future theft as temporally inverted ‘original accumulation’ – complicates
       socialist re-appropriation. Dispossession is yet to come. If the value of fossil assets is not
       simply based on past labor, but on the economic and ecological burdens they impose on
       the future, one cannot appropriate material wealth without the waste that goes along with
       it. Capital’s ecological afterlife would extend into post-capitalism. The revolution must
       therefore be reparative and not just re-appropriative. It needs to redeem past exploita-
       tions and future dispossessions – not only seize the wealth tied up in the shackles of
       private property but repair the damage caused by the polluting logic of appropriation.
       Conclusion                                            
       The climate emergency makes the negativity of property – destruction and dispossession
       – a more and more widely shared experience. This calls for an ecological critique of
       property that emphasizes the pollutive rather than productive character of appropriation.
       This article provides steps towards such a critique by illuminating the logic of future
       theft as a temporally and materially mediated class relation between fossil asset owners
       drawing value from and victims of climate damage becoming dispossessed in the future.
       Fossil asset ownership creates durable economic wealth for some but ecological waste
       for everybody. The contradiction of fossil capitalism between individual enrichment and
       collective impoverishment is glaring. But the temporal schism between the accumulation
       of fossil capital and the dispossession it depends on prohibits holding fossil companies
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                                 Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      and their shareholders fully accountable for climate damages. Carbon liabilities will out-
      live the fossil assets. However, this also prohibits finding refuge in the old apologies of
      property. Property is not productive but pollutive, it does not secure but endanger the
      future, it does not improve but ruin the planet and its inhabitants.
      Acknowledgements                                       
      I presented different parts and versions of this article at the Institute for Advanced Study in
      Princeton, Helsinki-University, Sciences Po Paris, Central European University in Vienna,
      Phillips-University Marburg, and online at the University of Jena and the School of Advanced
      Study, University of London. I thank the organizers for the invitations, the various prompts that
      inspired me to explore different facets of the article, and thought-provoking discussions. I would
      also like to thank the contributors to this Special Issue for an extremely insightful zoom discussion
      of my article. Last but not least, I thank the four anonymous referees for their enormously percep-
      tive and productive comments.                          
      Funding                                                
      The author disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or
      publication of this article: The work on this article has been funded by a grant from the German
      Research Foundation (Grant No. 433336180).             
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      Andreas Folkers https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6721-3663  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. On preemption in North-American property law that legalized the illicit land appropriations
        by settlers see Nichols (2020: 39).                  
      2. See: https://rwe.climatecase.org/en/legal           
      3. For a brilliant analysis of how this conundrum plays out in attempts to compensate indigenous
        people for colonial dispossessions see Nichols (2020).
      4. This hits particularly hard communities that have, historically, been excluded from ownership
        and/or victims of colonial dispossession. The enduring inequalities in ownership between
        black and white US-Americans represent a flagrant example (Taylor, 2019).
      References                                             
      Adkins, Lisa, Cooper, Melinda and Konings, Martijns (2020) The Asset Economy. Cambridge:
        Polity.                                              
      Agarwal, Anil and Narain, Sunita (1991) Global Warming in an Unequal World: A Case of
        Environmental Colonialism. New Delhi: Centre for Science and Environment.
      Appel, Hannah (2019) The Licit Life of Capitalism: US Oil in Equatorial Guinea. Durham, NC:
        Duke University Press.                               
      Archer, David (2016) The Long Thaw: How Humans are Changing the Next 100,000 Years of
        Earth’s Climate. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Asdal, Kristin and Lahn, Bard (2024) Governing as Valuing: Assetization and the Making of the
        Norwegian Wealth Fund. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 56(8): 2089–
        2104.                                                
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        17     
                                                             
       Beckert, Jens (2022) Durable wealth: Institutions, mechanisms, and practices of wealth perpetua-
         tion. Annual Review of Sociology 48(1): 233–255.    
       Bentham, Jeremy (1978) Security and equality of property. In: Macpherson, Crawford Brough
         (ed.) Property. Mainstream and Critical Positions. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto
         Press, pp. 41–58.                                   
       Bertram, Daniel (2022) Environmental justice ‘light’? Transnational tort litigation in the corporate
         Anthropocene. German Law Journal 23(5): 738–755.    
       Birch, Kean and Muniesa, Fabian (2020) Assetization: Turning Things into Assets in Technoscientific
         Capitalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.               
       Bridge, Gavin and Le Billon, Philippe (2017) Oil. Cambridge: Polity.
       Buller, Adrienne (2022) The Value of a Whale: On the Illusions of Green Capitalism. Manchester:
         Manchester University Press.                        
       Burkett, Maxine (2009) Climate reparations. Melbourne Journal of International Law 10: 509.
       Chancel, Lucas (2022) Global carbon inequality over 1990–2019. Nature Sustainability 5(11):
         931–938.                                            
       Chancel, Lucas, Bothe, Philipp and Voituriez, Tancrèe (2023) Climate Inequality Report 2023.
         World Inequality Lab. Study 2023/1. https://agritrop.cirad.fr/611813/1/611813.pdf
       Christophers, Brett (2020) Rentier Capitalism: Who Owns the Economy, and Who Pays for It?
         London: Verso Books.                                
       Coase, Ronald Harry (1960) The problem of social cost. The Journal of Law & Economics 56(4):
         837–877.                                            
       Coronil, Fernando (1997) The Magical State: Nature, Money, and Modernity in Venezuela.
         Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.           
       Dasgupta, Partha (2008) Discounting climate change. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 37: 141–
         169.                                                
       Davies, William (2020) Succession economics: Sustaining prosperity beyond death. CUSP Working
         Paper Series 24. https://research.gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/28781/1/WP24%E2%80%94Succession-
         Economics-web.pdf                                   
       Dehm, Julia (2023) Legally constituting value. The green economy and stranded assets. In:
         Feichtner, Isabel and Gordon, Geoff (eds) Constitutions of Value: Law, Governance, and
         Political Ecology. London: Routledge, pp. 255–275.  
       Doganova, Liliana (2024) Discounting the Future: The Ascendancy of a Political Technology.
         New York, NY: Zone Books.                           
       Edenhofer, Ottmar, Flachsland, Christian, Jakob, Michael, et al. (2013) The atmosphere as a global
         commons: Challenges for international cooperation and governance. The Harvard Project on
         Climate Agreements, Discussion Paper 13–58. https://www.pik-potsdam.de/members/edenh/
         publications-1/copy_of_HarvardKennedySchool.pdf     
       Ewald, François (2020) The Birth of Solidarity: The History of the French Welfare State. Durham,
         NC: Duke University Press.                          
       Field, Sean (2022) Carbon capital: The lexicon and allegories of US hydrocarbon finance. Economy
         and Society 51(2): 235–258.                         
       Folkers, Andreas (2020) Air-appropriation: The imperial origins and legacies of the Anthropocene.
         European Journal of Social Theory 23(4): 611–630.   
       Folkers, Andreas (2021) Fossil modernity: The materiality of acceleration, slow violence, and
         ecological futures. Time & Society 30(2): 223–246.  
       Folkers, Andreas (2024) Calculative futures between climate and finance: A tragedy
         of multiple horizons. The Sociological Review. Epub ahead of print 17 June 2024.
         DOI:10.1177/00380261241258832.                      

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                                 Theory, Culture & Society
                                                             
      Frey, Holger, Huggel, Christian, Chisolm, Rachel E., et al. (2018) Multi-source glacial lake out-
        burst flood hazard assessment and mapping for Huaraz, Cordillera Blanca, Peru. Frontiers in
        Earth Science 6: 210.                                
      Harvey, David (2014) The ‘new’ imperialism: Accumulation by dispossession. Socialist Register
        40: 63–87.                                           
      Heede, Richard (2014) Tracing anthropogenic carbon dioxide and methane emissions to fossil fuel
        and cement producers, 1854–2010. Climatic Change 122(1–2): 229–241.
      Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1991) Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Humphreys, Stephen (2022) Against future generations. European Journal of International Law
        33(4): 1061–1092.                                    
      Johnson, Leigh, Mikulewicz, Michael, Bigger, Patrick, et al. (2023) Intervention: The invisible
        labor of climate change adaptation. Global Environmental Change 83: 102769.
      Langley, Paul, Bridge, Gavin, Bulkeley, Harriet, et al. (2021) Decarbonizing capital: Investment,
        divestment and the qualification of carbon assets. Economy and Society 50(3): 494–516.
      Locke, John (1982 [1689]) Second Treatise of Government: An Essay Concerning the True
        Original Extent and End of Civil Government. Wheeling: Harlan Davidson.
      Luhmann, Niklas (1993) Das Recht der Gesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
      Luxemburg, Rosa (2015) The Accumulation of Capital. London: Routledge.
      Marx, Karl (2024 [1867]) Capital: Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1. Princeton, NJ:
        Princeton University Press.                          
      Mitchell, Timothy (2011) Carbon Democracy: Political Power in the Age of Oil. London: Verso.
      Mitchell, Timothy (2020) The body politic that captured the future. In: Latour, Bruno, Schaffer,
        Simon, and Gagliardi, Pasquale (eds) A Book of the Body Politic: Connecting Biology,
        Politics and Social Theory. San Giorgio: Fondazione Giorgio Cini, pp. 49–74.
      Mitchell, Timothy (2024) A better tomorrow, tomorrow? Climate crisis and the alibi of growth.
        Unpublished manuscript.                              
      Moore, Jason W. (2015) Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital.
        London: Verso.                                       
      Muniesa, Fabian, Doganova, Liliana, Ortiz, Horacio, et al. (2017) Capitalization: A Cultural
        Guide. Paris: Presses de Mines.                      
      Nichols, Robert (2020) Theft Is Property! Dispossession and Critical Theory. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Nitzan, Jonathan and Bichler, Shimshon (2009) Capital as Power: A Study of Order and Creorder.
        London: Routledge.                                   
      Nordhaus, William D. (2013) The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a
        Warming World. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
      Piketty, Thomas (2014) Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
        Press.                                               
      Pistor, Katharina (2019) The Code of Capital. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Radon, Jenik (2007) How to negotiate an oil agreement. In: Humphreys, Macartan, Sachs, Jeffrey,
        and Stiglitz, Joseph E. (eds) Escaping the Resource Curse. New York, NY: Columbia
        University Press, pp. 89–113.                        
      Randalls, Samuel (2011) Optimal climate change: Economics and climate science policy histories
        (from heuristic to normative). Osiris 26(1): 224–242.
      Richards, Julie-Anne and Boom, Keely (2014) Carbon Majors Funding Loss and Damage. Berlin:
        Heinrich Böll-Stiftung.                              
      Serres, Michel (2010) Malfeasance: Appropriation through Pollution? Stanford, CA: Stanford
        University Press.                                    

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Folkers                                        19     
                                                             
       Stuart-Smith, Rupert F., Roe, Gerhard H., Li, Sihan, et al. (2021) Increased outburst flood haz-
         ard from Lake Palcacocha due to human-induced glacier retreat. Nature Geoscience 14(2):
         85–90.                                              
       Táíwò, Olúfẹ́mi O. (2022) Reconsidering Reparations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta (2019) Race for Profit: How Banks and the Real Estate Industry
         Undermined Black Homeownership. Chapel Hill, NC: UNC Press.
       Veblen, Thorstein (1997) Absentee Ownership. Business Enterprise in Recent Times: The Case of
         America. London: Routledge.                         
       Walker-Crawford, Noah (2023) Climate change in the courtroom: An anthropology of neighborly
         relations. Anthropological Theory 23(1): 76–99.     
       Watts, Michael J. (2012) A tale of two gulfs: Life, death, and dispossession along two oil frontiers.
         American Quarterly 64(3): 437–467.                  
       WBGU (2009) Kassensturz für den Weltklimavertrag. Der Budgetansatz. Berlin: Wissenschaftlicher
         Beirat der Bundesregierung Globale Umweltveränderungen.
       Andreas Folkers is a Fellow at the Max Weber Centre, Erfurt and a Member of the Research
       Council at the Institute for Social Research, Frankfurt. He is currently finishing his second
       book: Fossil Modernity: A Natural History of the Present, under contract with Suhrkamp
       (German) and Zone (English). His work has been published in journals such as Economy and
       Society, Sociological Review, European Journal of Social Theory and Social Studies of
       Science.                                              
       This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘Planetary Property’,
       edited by Andreas Folkers and Alain Pottage.          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             