[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Post-Neoliberalism?                   
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                             2021,Vol.38(6)119–142
        Nudge   Economics     as                             
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2021
        Libertarian   Paternalism                            
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276421999447
        Nicholas Gane                                        
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Universityof Warwick                                 
        Abstract                                             
        Giventhegrowingprominenceofnudgeeconomicsbothwithinandbeyondtheacad-
        emy,itisatimelymomenttoreassessthephilosophicalandpoliticalargumentsthatsit
        at its core, and in particular what Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein call libertarian
        paternalism.Thefirsthalfofthispaperprovidesadetailedaccountofthemainfeatures
        ofthisformofpaternalism,beforemoving,inthesecondhalf,toacriticalevaluationof
        thenudgeagenda thatquestions,among other things,thegenderedbasis ofpaternal-
        istic governance; the idea of ‘nudging for good’; and the political values that underpin
        nudge.ThefinalsectionofthispaperbuildsontheexistingworkofJohnMcMahonby
        askingwhetherlibertarianpaternalismshouldbeunderstoodasanew,hybridformof
        neoliberalism,or,rather,asapost-neoliberalformofgovernancethathasemergedout
        of, and flourished in, the post-crisis situation.    
        Keywords                                             
        behavioural economics, libertarian paternalism, neoliberalism, nudge, Sunstein, Thaler
                                                             
        In 2008, at the very point at which the global financial crisis unfolded,
        Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein published their landmark book
        Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness. The
        successofthisbook,whichhasnowsoldover1.5million copies,wasnot
        unconnected to the timing of its publication, for as financial markets
        entered a state of all-out panic, Nudge insisted that we should move
        away from models of markets made up of fully rational actors and
        towards an understanding of humans as beings that, by nature, are
        prone to making mistakes. The arguments of Nudge were not altogether
        new, as they built on previous attempts by figures such as Daniel
        KahnemanandAmosTverskytoapplyinsightsfrombehaviouralpsych-
        ology to thefield of economics (see Thaler, 2015,for adetailed account).
        What was new, however, was that Nudge presented and applied these
        insights in ways that could be understood both by policy makers and lay
        readers, while at the same time advancing an intellectual critique of
        Correspondingauthor:NicholasGane.Email:n.gane@warwick.ac.uk
        TCSOnlineForum:https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/ 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      120                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      neoclassical ideas of market equilibrium and the homo economicus. Not
      surprisingly, Nudge attracted extensive critical scrutiny from across the
      socialsciences(see,forexample,Johnetal.,2009;Anderson,2010;Jones
      et al, 2013; Leggett, 2014) in the immediate years following its publica-
      tion, but since this early wave of interest the intellectual status and gov-
      ernmental influence of nudge economics have grown markedly. In 2017,
      Thaler won the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences, and in 2018 Sunstein
      was awarded the prestigious Holberg Prize by the Norwegian govern-
      ment. Meanwhile, on the ground, the flagship UK Behavioural Insights
      Team, which was championed at its outset by the then Prime Minister,
      David Cameron, and advised by Thaler (see Thaler, 2015: 330–45;
      Halpern, 2015), has expanded from a team of seven people based in
      the Cabinet Office to a ‘global social purpose company’ that has
      worked on 750 projects worldwide and has trained 20,000 civil servants
      and practitioners in ‘behavioural insights’ of different kinds (see https://
      www.bi.team/about-us/).                                
        Over the past decade, nudge economics has moved from strength to
      strength, both within the academy and policy circles, leading David
      Halpern, Chief Executive of the Behavioural Insights Team, to declare
      triumphantly: ‘one thing is for sure: nudging – the use of behavioural
      insights and the experimental methods it has brought in its wake – are
      here to stay’ (2015: 351). This prediction has thus far proved to be cor-
      rect, as in the UK a number of prominent behavioural scientists, includ-
      ing Halpern, have become members of the Scientific Advisory Groupfor
      Emergencies (SAGE): the body to have provided ‘scientific and technical
      advice’toaidgovernmentdecision-makingthroughthecurrentCovid-19
      crisis. Indeed, in the UK ‘behavioural insights’ have been central to the
      government’s response to this crisis: from the idea of herd immunity
      advanced by Halpern (which was initially adopted but soon dropped
      by the government) through to practical nudges designed to encourage
      mask-wearing and effective hand-washing (see https://www.bi.team/our-
      work/covid-19/). Nudging, it seems, is not only here to stay, as Halpern
      predicted, but is becoming increasingly prominent as both a theory and
      technique of governance.                               
        Given this, it is a timely moment to reassess the philosophical and
      political commitments that sit at the core of nudge theory. While, at
      first sight, the growing prominence of behavioural economics might
      seemfarremovedfromtheconcernofthisspecialissue–post-neoliberal-
      ism – this is not the case, as the success of Nudge is underpinned by an
      argument for a particular type of political-economic governance that
      works out of but also beyond existing forms of neoliberal reason (see
      McMahon, 2015): what Thaler and Sunstein call libertarian paternalism.
      This article will look critically at this form of paternalism, the details of
      which have been rearticulated and refined by Thaler (2015) and Sunstein
      (2014,2019a) many times sincethe publication ofNudge;something that

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         121     
                                                             
        has been neglected in existing analyses of nudge economics in favour of
        assessment of different behavioural policy interventions (notable excep-
        tionsarePykett,2012;Brown,2012;Curchin,2016;Hansen,2016).With
        this aim, the first half of this paper provides an outline of Thaler and
        Sunstein’s conception of libertarian paternalism, before moving, in the
        second half, to a critical evaluation of the nudge agenda that will ques-
        tion, among other things, the gendered basis of paternalistic governance;
        the idea of ‘nudging for good’; and the political values that underpin
        Nudge. The final section of this paper, in keeping with the broader aims
        of this special issue, will build on the work of McMahon (2015) by
        arguing that libertarian paternalism is a new, hybrid form of neoliberal-
        ism, rather than something that might be termed ‘post-neoliberal’; one
        that departs, in important respects, from Austrian, German and North
        American trajectories of neoliberal reason while, at the same time,
        developing and extending these in new ways by addressing the ‘internal-
        ities’ of consumer behaviour that cannot be disciplined and corrected by
        raw market forces.                                   
                                                             
        What is Libertarian Paternalism?                     
        Attheheartofthenudgeagendaisanidealofsoftgovernancethatseems
        contradictory in basis: libertarian paternalism. This term, which was ori-
        ginally to be the title of the book Nudge (Thaler, 2015: 324), was first
        articulatedbyThalerandSunsteininapaperpublishedin2003,inwhich
        they argue for a form of soft paternalism that operates without coercion
        and which seeks to influence individuals to make better consumer and
        lifestyle choices rather than, in the spirit of harder forms of state pater-
        nalism, restrict the range of choices on offer. The idea is that libertarian-
        ism and paternalism can be combined in order to correct the deficiencies
        that, for Thaler and Sunstein, are inherent in both. For, on one hand,
        hard paternalism is said to impinge on individual freedom of choice,
        while, on the other, raw libertarianism assumes that individual con-
        sumers are rational creatures that are able to act in their own best inter-
        ests. Thaler and Sunstein argue instead that humans are not ‘econs’ (see
        Thaler, 2015: 348) and do not act like the idealized subject of homo
        economicus as they are afflicted by behavioural biases of different kinds
        (overreaction, lack of self-control, over-confidence, guilt, to name but a
        few; see Thaler, 2015), and so may not be able to make optimal choices
        from which they will benefit. For this reason, a form of soft paternalism
        is needed to improve the choices made by individuals without coercing
        themtoactagainsttheirwill.Tothisend,ThalerandSunsteinarguethat
        experts with an understanding of behavioural science can gently ‘nudge’
        people to make choices that will improve their lives in ways that do not
        restrict the freedoms of those involved. They write: ‘Because people are
        humans not econs... they make predictable errors. If we can anticipate
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      122                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      those errors, we can devise policies that will reduce the error rate’
      (Thaler, 2015: 325). And in an earlier paper: ‘Our goal... [is]... to
      defend libertarian paternalism, an approach that preserves freedom of
      choice but that authorizes both private and public institutions to steer
      peopleindirectionsthatwillpromotetheirwelfare’(ThalerandSunstein,
      2003: 179). On this basis, Thaler and Sunstein argue that libertarianism
      andpaternalismare‘farmoreattractivetogetherthanalone’(Thalerand
      Sunstein, 2008: 5). For by improving the architecture of choice (soft
      paternalism), rather than restricting choice through state-imposed man-
      dates and bans (hard paternalism), they argue that individuals can be
      empowered to make better choices for themselves, thereby limiting the
      extent and reach of government and state-based forms of coercion (in
      keeping with a libertarian ethos).                     
        In the introduction to Nudge, Thaler and Sunstein articulate this vision
      of libertarian paternalism in further detail, and, in particular, attempt to
      defend their position against libertarian critics who might argue that any
      form of paternalism, no matter how soft it be, inevitably introduces elem-
      ents of coercion and control that restrict individual freedoms. Against this
      charge, they cite Milton Friedman, and argue not only that people should
      be ‘free to choose’, but also that freedom can be enhanced rather than
      restricted by altering the structure of choice to benefit the chooser. They
      are vocal on this point: ‘Libertarian paternalists want to make it easy for
      peopletogotheirownway;theydonotwanttoburdenthosewhowantto
      exercise their freedom’ (2008: 5). They argue that ‘choice architects’ can
      help individuals go their own way by nudging them to make choices that
      will make their lives ‘longer, happier, and better’, and that the value of
      these choices, ultimately, is to be judged not by the experts who do the
      nudging but by individuals who are the recipients of the nudge. They add
      that nudging tends to involve modest interventions, including setting
      default options for consumers in order to make choice easier (see, for
      example, Thaler and Sunstein, 2008: 14), if indeed choice subsequently
      remains necessary. Thaler and Sunstein anticipate that this could alarm
      more traditional libertarians who loathe placing trust in government offi-
      cials,bureaucrats andexperts,on the groundsthat this can empower them
      toactintheirowninterests.Inresponse,ThalerandSunsteinstatethat‘we
      share these concerns’, and, because of this, ‘we emphatically agree that for
      government,therisksofmistake,bias,andoverreachingarerealandsome-
      timesserious’.Butthisconcern,theysay,bolstersratherthandetractsfrom
      theirbrandoflibertarianpaternalism:‘Wefavournudgesovercommands,
      requirements, and prohibitions in part for that reason’ (2008: 11). They
      argue that nudge economics safeguards against government coercion
      because it works by preserving individual freedom of choice (Thaler and
      Sunstein, 2008: 12), and, more than this, it can enhance such freedom by
      enabling individuals to navigate life-choices in ways that will bring greater
      benefits to themselves (Sunstein, 2019: 1–10).         

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         123     
                                                             
         While the arguments of Nudge have been celebrated in some circles as
        being‘groundbreaking’(Brown,2014),ThalerandSunsteinarenotalone
        in seeking to reinvent paternalism as a form of contemporary govern-
        ance. Through the 1990s, Lawrence Mead – one of the most prominent
        neo-conservative commentators on questions of welfare and poverty –
        laid the grounds of a ‘new’ paternalism that was intended to control the
        lives of the poor (see Mead, 1997: 6). Mead’s work is important because
        he was the figure to reintroduce the idea of paternalism into mainstream
        USandthenUKpoliticsthroughthisperiod(hiswork,forexample,was
        ofinteresttotheInstituteofEconomicAffairs,whichpublishedanedited
        collection, From Welfare to Work, which had the subtitle Lessons from
        America;seeMeadetal.,1997).Itis,asCurchin(2016)suggests,instruct-
        ive to compare Mead’s work to that of Thaler and Sunstein, as it is
        against the backdrop of his ‘new’ paternalism that their brand of liber-
        tarian paternalism can be considered something new. While neither
        Thaler nor Sunstein reference Mead in their major writings, Mead, for
        his part, wrote an early review of Nudge, through the course of which he
        is critical of their ‘libertarian’ commitment to turn welfare ‘obligations’
        into individual ‘choices’ (see Mead, 2009). It is useful to turn back to
        Mead’s work to consider the type of paternalism against which Nudge is
        positioned, even if implicitly, and to address the political values that
        underpin Thaler and Sunstein’s commitment to a libertarian alternative.
         The obvious place to start is Mead’s edited collection The New
        Paternalism, at the outset of which paternalism is defined as ‘the close
        supervisionofthedependent’(1997:1).Mead’sconcerninthisvolumeis
        apoliticalone:todevelopnew‘supervisorypolicies’thatcanbe‘directed
        toward the poor or disadvantaged, or at least members of these groups
        who become dependent on society’ (1997: 2). The aim of such policies is
        to move from a conception of welfare as an automatic right for the poor
        to something that is to be dependent on them meeting ‘certain behav-
        ioural requirements’ (Mead, 1997: 2; emphasis added). Underlying this
        shiftisadistinctionbetweenthepoorthataredeserving,orwhoarewell-
        behaved and exhibit the correct behavioural traits, and the deviant poor
        who are not. Mead’s blueprint for a ‘new paternalism’ centres explicitly
        on changing the behaviour and habits of the poor, and in the first eight
        pages of The New Paternalism, there are four references to ‘behavioural
        requirements’ and one reference to ‘good behaviour’. For Mead, behav-
        ioural change is to be achieved through government-led initiatives that
        actively seek to change and control the lifestyles of the poor, first, by
        enforcing norms that should be obligatory (for example, ‘policies that
        make school attendance compulsory for children or require welfare
        recipients to work as a condition of receiving aid’ (1997: 4); and,
        second, by granting government agencies the power ‘to judge individual
        interests’ and, with this, the ‘right to tell its dependents how to live, at
        least in some respects’ (1997: 4). This is the basis of a new paternalist

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      124                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      social policy that is ‘directive’ in basis, and which emphasizes the obli-
      gationsofwelfare‘clients’insteadofprioritizingtheirrightsorneeds(see
      Mead, 1997: 21).                                       
        Mead’s primary contribution to a social policy that is directive in this
      way is workfare (see Mead et al., 1997): a government-led initiative that
      seeks to address ‘low work levels among poor adults’ by enforcing work
      as a requirement for welfare benefits provided by the state in return.
      Mead argues that this form of directive social policy is required because
      the poor cannot be left to seek work on a voluntary basis as their situ-
      ation results from their ‘passivity’, or, put bluntly, from the fact that
      ‘they do so little to help themselves’ (1992: 213). Active governance
      from state agencies is thus needed, for Mead, to discipline the poor in
      ordertomakesurethatwelfaresupportiswell-deserved.Thismeansthat
      poverty is treated as something rooted in the behaviour and values of
      those who are dependent on welfare for their survival, not as a systemic
      property of a capitalist system that operates to the advantage of a few
      againstthemany.TherearesimilaritiesherewiththeworkofGiddens,in
      which the poor are encouraged to change their lifestyles by becoming
      more entrepreneurial and engaging in ‘active risk taking’ to better them-
      selves (see Giddens, 1998: 116). But in the work of Mead, more directly,
      thepoorareseen tobeatblame forbeingpoor,andbecauseofthistheir
      positioncanbeimprovedthroughstateinterventionandgovernancethat
      changes their behaviour and conduct.                   
        This argument has a strong racial dimension. For just as the poor are
      said to be at blame for their position because of their lack of desire to
      work, Mead argues that ‘black success’ is prevented, for the most part,
      not by structural forms of racism and discrimination, but by misplaced
      beliefs and inadequate family structures (see Mead et al., 1997: 14–15).
      Mead’s answer is to emphasize and enforce the value of work, which is
      said to be the cure for ‘family failures’ and the moral ineptitude of the
      poor. He writes: ‘Those who would be free must first be bound... The
      source of bondage for today’s seriously poor is no longer social injustice
      but the disorders of their private lives. For these Americans, the way
      forward is no longer liberation but obligation’ (p. 15). And this, in
      sum, is the basis of his new paternalism: a corrective form of governance
      thatidentifiesthecausesofinequalityaslyingwithintheprivatelivesand
      associated family structures of individuals, and which sees paid work,
      rather than welfare, as the solution.                  
        It would appear, at first sight, that the new paternalism of Mead and
      the libertarian paternalism of Thaler and Sunstein are far removed from
      one another. Mead, in a review of Nudge, takes issue with many of the
      core principles of Thaler and Sunstein’s work. He argues that while, in
      Nudge, humans are presented as irrational beings, there is one group, in
      particular, that possesses ‘serious dysfunctions’: the underclass. Because
      ofthis,hesays,socialpolicyshouldbestronglypaternalistic,andthatfor

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         125     
                                                             
        the benefit of society more widely the behaviour of this group must be
        governed: ‘Welfare recipients must work to get aid, the homeless must
        obey rules to get shelter, and students must pass tests to be promoted in
        school. Those demands are not libertarian. They are presented as obli-
        gations, not choices’ (Mead, 2009). Mead, furthermore, objects to the
        underlying economism of Thaler and Sunstein’s position, arguing that
        while they are critical of homo economicus, nonetheless they remain
        wedded to a model of economic (ir)rationality, and this, among other
        things, ignores the moral basis of capitalism. This underlying morality,
        which is not purely economic in basis, is, he argues, rooted in the ‘ten-
        dency to care about the views of others’, and is not a violation of ration-
        ality but a virtue that is a distinguishing feature of the modern Western
        order, one that is missing elsewhere. Mead writes: ‘A lack of trust and
        civility is one reason markets fail to make societies rich in the less devel-
        oped world’ (2009).                                  
         Such proclamations are far removed from the soft economic paternal-
        ism advocated by Thaler and Sunstein, and there are at least three other
        differencesbetweennudgeeconomicsandMead’snewpaternalismthatare
        worthy of note; differences that in some respects also reveal points of
        convergence. First, whereas Mead’s work centres on correcting the poor
        by requiring them to work for benefits, Thaler and Sunstein frame Nudge
        asbeingofuniversalbenefittohumankind,notjustthepoor,byencoura-
        gingindividuals to become better,self-benefittingconsumers. Rather than
        targeting a group explicitly, such as the ‘black’ and ‘poor’ in the work of
        Mead, which is then directed to improve itself through work, the nudge
        agenda seeks to empower individuals in general to better their lives by
        nudging them closer to a fictional model of homo economicus. The ques-
        tion, however, is whether nudges are indeed to be applied in general or
        rather to improve the lives of individuals who deviate furthest from an
        economically ‘rational’ behavioural norm. If the rich, while still prone to
        making mistakes, come closest to this norm given that at some point they
        havemadegoodfinancialdecisions,thendoesthismeanthatitisthepoor,
        in particular, that need nudging to be better decision-makers? And does
        this imply, by extension, and in line with the work of Mead, that poverty
        can be explained by the behavioural traits of different individuals and
        groups? It might be noted that this is not the only point on which the
        positionsofMead andThalerand Sunstein potentially converge,forboth
        call for responsibilities to be passed downwards from the state to individ-
        uals who are then expected to take better care of themselves. In the work
        ofMeadthepoorshouldtakeresponsibilityfortheirownfatewhilebeing
        directed and supervised by state agencies, while in Thaler and Sunstein
        individual consumers are to be nudged to make choices from which they
        will benefit. What is missing, however, in both cases, is any concern for
        structural forms of power and privilege that produce and maintain forms
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      126                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      of material inequality and which shape and constrain the very basis of
      choice-making; a point to which we will return below.  
        Second, whereas Mead’s directive social policy is to be government-
      led, the work of Thaler and Sunstein gives increased prominence to
      ‘experts’ or ‘choice architects’ who not only declare themselves to be
      politically neutral (see Thaler and Sunstein, 2008: 14–15), but also
      claim to reduce the cost and increase the effectiveness of government
      through the application of scientific methods and principles drawn
      from the field of behavioural science. Will Davies rightly views the emer-
      gence of such experts as a key feature of neoliberalism: ‘We see
      new breeds of expert – coach, regulator, risk manager, strategist, guru
      – offering toolkits and advice on how to navigate and act upon a con-
      stantly changing and unpredictable environment’ (2014: 29). He adds
      that these ‘technocrats do not fit tidily into categories of ‘‘science’’ or
      ‘‘politics’’, as they are neither ‘‘objectively’’ disengaged like the scientist,
      nor goal oriented like the politician’ (2014: 29). Does this description
      apply to choice architects such as Thaler and Sunstein? They claim
      that the nudgeagenda is independent of any particular political ideology
      because it is underpinned by hard science, and, because of this, can be
      used to cross ‘partisan divides’ (2008: 15). At the conclusion of his book
      Misbehaving, Thaler declares that behavioural scientists ‘have a lot of
      wisdom’, and that we should draw on this ‘by carefully selecting nudges
      basedonscienceandsubjectingthesetorigoroustests’(2015:345;onthe
      use of randomized control trials, which Sunstein (2014: 11) terms ‘the
      goldstandardforempiricalresearch’,seeThaler,2015:338–43).Whether
      nudgeeconomicsisindeedaformofvalue-freesciencewillbeconsidered
      below, but, for the moment, it is important to note that the goal of the
      nudgeisnottointroducenewgovernment-ledinitiatives, suchasMead’s
      workfare, but to transform the understandings and techniques of gov-
      ernment itself through the application of principles drawn from behav-
      ioural science, or what Davies (2014: 167) aptly terms ‘economic
      psychology’. Throughout Nudge, the gains from such behaviourally-
      informed government are presented primarily in economic terms: they
      can help cut through red-tape and avoid waste (on the so-called ‘Red
      Tape Challenge’ see Halpern, 2015: 57); they can make changes to the
      underlying architecture of consumer choice at very little cost; and
      because of this there is ‘no burden on taxpayers at all’ (Thaler and
      Sunstein, 2008: 14). The aim, then, is to transform the culture and prac-
      ticeofgovernmentratherthanextendthescopeandreachofstatepower,
      as with the harder paternalism advocated by Mead. Hence, Thaler and
      Sunstein declare, in a key opening passage of Nudge, that ‘we are not for
      bigger government, just for better governance’ (2008: 15, emphasis in
      original).                                             
        Third, whereas, for Mead, the family is the key social institution for
      promoting personal and public welfare, the value and role of this

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         127     
                                                             
        institution within nudge theory is less clear. One complication is that
        Thaler and Sunstein draw a vision of libertarianism from the work of
        Milton Friedman, and in particular from his co-authored book with his
        wife Rose Friedman, Free to Choose (1980). While it might be presumed
        that a strong libertarian position such as that advanced by Friedman
        might not see the value of social institutions such as the family, quite
        the opposite is the case. For in Free to Choose, Milton and Rose
        Friedman state that: ‘The family, rather than the individual, has
        always been and remains today the basic building block of our society,
        thoughitsholdhasclearlybeenweakening–oneofthemostunfortunate
        consequencesofthegrowthofgovernmentpaternalism’(1980:33).While
        itmightcomeasasurprisethat,forFriedman,thefamilyratherthanthe
        marketisthekeysocietalinstitution,asMelindaCooper(2017:42–9)has
        shown in detail, this position is closely tied to his broader stance on the
        question of welfare reform. How, then, do Thaler and Sunstein position
        themselves in relation to these arguments by Friedman and Mead on the
        status of thefamily? Their answeris to radicalize Friedman’s libertarian-
        ism byarguing thatif government paternalism has a tendency to weaken
        the family unit, then the solution is to privatize marriage so that ‘the
        directive and exclusionary role of the state’ is reduced (Thaler and
        Sunstein, 2008: 221). Their position is thus quite different to neo-con-
        servative approaches, including the new paternalism of Mead, that seek
        to reinstate traditional family values. Their answer instead is to argue
        that the current institution of marriage ‘is not nearly libertarian enough’
        (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008: 218) as it ‘creates a monopoly on the legal
        form of marriage; imposes sharp limits on who may enter and how; and
        accompanies the legal form with material and symbolic benefits that it
        aloneconfers’(2008:219).ThalerandSunsteinareinsistentthatthestate
        should not interfere in such private matters, but with one notable excep-
        tion: where the interests of children are involved. In such cases, legal
        ‘mandates’ rather than mere behavioural nudges are said to be ‘perfectly
        appropriate’ (2008: 218).                            
         Suchquestionsregardingthelimitsofstatepaternalism,includingwho
        it should apply to and the form it should take, return us to the concerns
        of 19th-century political economy and in particular the work of John
        Stuart Mill, which, at its core, addresses what Claeys terms ‘the nature
        and limits of the power which can be legitimately exercised by society
        over the individual’ (Mill, 1991: 5). Mill’s ideas feature prominently in
        theworkoflibertarianpaternalistssuchasSunstein,andinparticularhis
        book Why Nudge?, which takes the following passage from Mill’s On
        Liberty as one of its epigraphs:                     
         The only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over
         any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent
         harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      128                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or for-
        bear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make
        him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be
        wise, or even right. (Sunstein, 2014; see Mill, 1991: 14)
                                                             
      This passage is quoted routinely within libertarian readings of Mill (of
      which there are many; see Claeys, 2013: 1) that call for freedom of the
      individual from the powersof the stateexcept ininstances where harm is
      causedtoothers(theso-called‘harmprinciple’). Insuchreadings,Millis
      celebrated as a champion of negative liberty and of the private freedoms
      of the individual, as exemplified by his declaration that ‘Over himself,
      overhisownbodyandmind,theindividualissovereign’(Mill,1991:14).
      But caution must be exercised here as, isolated passages aside, Mill is by
      no means a libertarian in the sense advocated by Thaler and Sunstein.
      Elsewhere in On Liberty, Mill, while asserting the value of individuality,
      not only declares that ‘no person is an entirely isolated being’ (1991: 88),
      with the implication that private choices and harms are likely to impact
      on the lives of others, but also that the state should be positioned to
      maintain ‘a vigilant control’ of the power an individual can exercise over
      others(see1991:116).Moreover,asClaeys(2013:11)rightlyargues,itis
      a mistake to read Mill’s On Liberty in isolation from his other major
      works, in particular Principles of Political Economy. A broader reading
      of Mill reveals that in important respects he favoured state intervention
      to promote social equality and justice – a commitment that is far
      removed from the work of Friedman, which, in turn, is the touchstone
      of libertarianism for Thaler and Sunstein. Claeys (2013: 119) observes
      that,forMill, suchintervention istotakemany differentforms: thestate
      shouldtackleinequalitythroughredistributivetaxationandlandreform;
      it should exclude uneducated people from franchise; and it should coun-
      ter the excesses of free market capitalism through the introduction of
      PoorLaws. Andonthisbasis,ClaeysdescribesMill’sapproachaspater-
      nalist rather than libertarian, for ‘it sought to augment happiness, secur-
      ity, liberty and equality where these failed to result from individual
      activity freely themselves’ (2013: 122). Nothing, seemingly, could be fur-
      ther from the libertarian cause.                       
        Sunstein does not side either with Mill’s state paternalism (as
      described by Claeys above, and which is barely recognized in
      Sunstein’s account) or with his harm principle. Rather, Why Nudge?
      (2014) opens with the declaration that ‘it is exceedingly important to
      limit the power of government, and of course individuals often know
      best. Adults should not be treated like children’. It continues: ‘On
      those scores, Mill still has a great deal to teach us’ (2014: 5). Sunstein,
      however, objects to Mill’s harm principle (which is not seen to be pater-
      nalistic; see Sunstein, 2014: 80) onthe grounds thathumans are prone to
      behavioural biases of different types and thus make mistakes that can

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         129     
                                                             
        result in serious harm to themselves and to others (see Sunstein, 2014:
        163). For this reason, he argues, a soft form of paternalism is necessary
        to tackle the ‘internalities’, or the irrationalities of individual choice-
        making that lead to ‘problems of self-control and errors in judgement’
        (Sunstein,2014:37),ratherthantheexternalities,orunforeseenrisksand
        uncertainties, that have been a key concern of economics from the work
        of Arthur Pigou onwards.                             
         Sunsteinrefinesthisargumentbymakingtwoimportantqualifications
        about the type of paternalism he has in mind. First, he draws a distinc-
        tion between ‘means’ paternalists, who seek to improve the choices
        people make to reach their desired ends, and ‘ends’ paternalists, who
        attempt to narrow freedom of choice with the intention of benefitting
        the well-being of the chooser. Sunstein firmly advocates the former
        (means paternalism) and argues that the aim of libertarian paternalism
        is ‘to create choice architecture that will make it more likely that people
        willpromotetheirownends,astheythemselvesunderstandthem’(2014:19,
        emphasis in original). And second, he argues that the nudge agenda is in
        keeping with ‘soft’ paternalism in so far as it seeks to ‘improve people’s
        welfare by influencing their choices without imposing material costs on
        these choices’ (2014: 58, emphasis in original). On both counts,
        Sunstein argues, this form of paternalism can still be termed libertarian
        because it seeks neither to direct people towards particular ends nor
        restrict the range of ends from which they are able to choose.
         SunsteinreturnstothesequestionsinhisbookOnFreedom(2019a),in
        which he identifies what he calls ‘navigability’ as the main challenge for
        people to be free in the modern world. For while individuals should be
        free to do what they wish without harming or coercing others, the ques-
        tionsthatfollowas aconsequenceare: whatifthey‘do notknowhowto
        findtheirway?Whatiftheyhavenoidea?’(2019a:1).Theansweristhat
        choice architects should help people select the right means to reach their
        desiredendsordestination,notbyprovidingrulesorguidancebutrather
        ‘a kind of map’ (2019a: 40) that suggests possible routes to different
        destinations without prescribingany in particular. Again,it isinstructive
        tocontrastthisposition tothatofMead,asthequestionofnavigationis
        a repeated theme in his work on what he calls the ‘passivity’ of the poor.
        Mead explains that in using the term ‘passive’, ‘I do not mean they lack
        allenergy–theiractivitymaybefrenetic–buttheiractionslackpurpose
        and direction’ (Mead, 1992: 213). And because of this, he argues, super-
        vised programs of workfare, rather than a ‘map’, are necessary: ‘These
        measures assumethatthepeopleconcernedneed assistance butthatthey
        also need direction if they are to live constructively’ (Mead, 1994: 2).
        Whereas, for Mead, workfare is the means not only to welfare but to
        citizenship and inclusionwithin societymoregenerally, Sunsteinseeksto
        apply theories and methods of behavioural science in order to identify
        specific ‘human’ behavioural traits or internalities that can be addressed

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      130                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      through new forms of psychological governance – traits that include
      ‘limited attention’, ‘self-control problems’, and ‘behavioural biases’
      such as short-term attention to the present (see Mead, 2019: 15). As a
      consequence, Sunstein does not move directly from a behavioural ana-
      lysis of specific groups to a set of disciplinary policy interventions, as in
      Mead’s new paternalism, but instead insists that nudges can be deployed
      to help groups of individuals, most notably the poor, to help themselves.
      He declares, for example, that ‘insufficient navigability’ is a ‘pervasive
      problem’forpoorpeople,andthatnudgearchitectsshouldmakemodest
      interventions to structure choice to enable them to find the ‘right track’.
      The answer, he argues, is not to impose rules or burdens, but to make it
      easier for individuals to navigate themselves through different life-
      choices. The idea of a map is again used to illustrate this point: ‘A
      GPS device respects people’s ends; it does not quarrel with their judge-
      ment about their preferred destination’ (Sunstein, 2019a: 47). The land-
      scape of capitalist society is thus not identified as the problem (if
      anything it is naturalized by representing it in the form of a map), but
      ratherhowindividualscannavigatethisworldsuccessfully,tothebenefit
      of themselves. This means that there is little, if any, attention, to the
      social and political topologies of this map that make travel to certain
      destinations possible for some but not for others.     
      The Choice Architect as Father Figure?                 
                                                             
      While Thaler and Sunstein’s nudge philosophy is built upon the above
      commitment to libertarian paternalism, most critical engagement with
      their work has centred on the former of these two terms and has left
      their idea of paternalism largely untouched. This is surprising not least
      because paternalism, as a form of authority, is gendered, as it appeals by
      definition to the wisdom and power of the father (pater-). Jessica Pykett
      is one of the few critics to address this aspect of nudge theory, as she
      argues that Nudge is gendered to its core as, first, its theoretical frame-
      work is based on ‘insights from sometimes highly gendered accounts of
      human behaviour’ (2012: 219–20); and, second, its commitment to liber-
      tarian paternalism reproduces a view of the welfare or ‘nanny’ state as a
      feminine form from which women are ‘illegitimate beneficiaries’, and in
      its place asserts a ‘masculine norm of independence and self-reliance’
      (2012: 231). Pykett rightly calls into question the gendered politics of
      Thaler and Sunstein’s libertarianism but, in so doing, says little about
      their accompanying commitment to paternalism, even though this form
      of authority is said to provide a corrective to the flaws of previous forms
      of libertarian thinking and politics. In order to consider the values that
      underpin nudge theory, it is thus necessary to look more closely at the
      conceptandpoliticsofpaternalismandaskwhythisideaoccupiessucha
      central place in Thaler and Sunstein’s work.           
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         131     
                                                             
         This, however, is more difficult than it might seem as there are sur-
        prisingly few existing analyses of paternalism. One exception is a book-
        length study by John Kleinig, which defines paternalism as a form of
        ‘enforcedbenevolence’thatisbasedonamodelof‘familialrelationships’
        within which‘parents actonthepresumptionthattheyknowbetter than
        the child what is best for the latter’ (1983: 4). Kleinig argues that these
        relationships are based on a model of the authority of the ‘parent (or
        father)’, and adds that there is an ‘implicit sexism’ to this term, particu-
        larly when it is used ‘to characterize circumstances in which women are
        singled out as the special object of enforced benevolence... (in virtue of
        their status as ‘‘the weaker sex’’)’ (1983: 4). Kleinig’s bracketing out of
        the ‘father’ is disappointing as it avoids the question of whether pater-
        nal forms of authority are gendered by definition, a move confirmed by
        his declaration that he is interested in enforced benevolence in general
        ratherthan‘itssexistmanifestations’andthusin‘parentalismratherthan
        paternalism in a restricted sense’ (1983: 4). This sidesteps the issue: that
        paternalism is a concept that invokes a patriarchal ideal of the family
        within which the father carries authority and thus is said to know best –
        both within and beyond the household. Viewed in this way, paternalism
        cannotbereadina‘restrictedsense’asitisnotamodelofparenthoodin
        general or in the abstract, but rather a direct appeal to the power of the
        father, not only within the family unit but, potentially, within any other
        social institution.                                  
         Through the course of Nudge, Thaler and Sunstein assert the norma-
        tive value of this form of authority by making it central to what they see
        as good governance and improved choice-making. Given this, Pykett
        finds it ‘extraordinary’ that ‘so little time is given to considering the
        question of gender’, especially as the ideas of John Stuart Mill feature
        so prominently in their work. Mill argued, among other things, ‘that
        liberty should be extended to women hitherto excluded from self-deter-
        mination and well-being’ (Pykett, 2012: 232), and his gender politics
        proved to be divisive within the history of 20th-century libertarian and
        neoliberal thought. Ludwig von Mises, for example, argued that Mill’s
        ‘feeble compromises’ were made ‘under the influence of his wife’ (1985:
        195),andimpliesthatthiswastherootcauseforthedeclineofhisliberal
        project – a position that was not shared, in turn, by Hayek (1951).
        However,evenifonecelebratesMill’sprogressiveviewsongenderequal-
        ity, serious problems remain with his concept of paternalism, which
        advocates the exercise of power over populations that are said to be
        unable to govern themselves, usually on the grounds that they lack cul-
        tural, economic or political development. Against the use of such a con-
        cept, the answer is not to follow Kleinig, and arguably Thaler and
        Sunstein, in using paternalism in a ‘less restricted way’, but rather to
        take issue with the type of authority that is invoked by the use of this
        term – a form of authority that is not onlyimplicitly gendered but which

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      132                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      has been used, more generally, to legitimate the exercise of absolute
      power over subjects deemed too unenlightened to be capable of self-
      determination.                                         
        Mill’s position in Principles of Political Economy is that liberty should
      ‘applyonlytohumanbeingsinthematurityoftheirfaculties’,andthatin
      cases where societies are ‘backward’ there is a case for ‘despotism as a
      legitimate mode of government’ (see Mill, 1991: 14–15; for a more
      detailed assessment of such passages in Mill’s work see Claeys, 2013:
      93–9). Sunstein is aware of this argument by Mill, which he says raises
      ‘obvious questions about parochialism and condescension’ (2014: 34).
      But he is seemingly oblivious that such arguments have been deployed
      historically in order to justify patriarchal and colonial forms of govern-
      ancethathavesoughttoexcludepopulationsfromdemocraticfreedoms.
      QuinnSlobodianaddressesthisissueindetailinhisbookGlobalists,and
      quotes Fritz Machlup, a member of the Mont Pelerin Society and
      President of the International Economic Association from 1971–4:
        LetmerecallMill’sdictumthattherecanbenolibertyfor‘savages’.
        Replace this harsh word by ‘politically and intellectually immature
        people’ and reflect on the proposition that full democracy may not
        bethemostsuitablesystemofgovernmentforsuchpeople;that,for
        example, the unlimited right to vote and elect the men who will
        govern the country may lead to the destruction of many other free-
        doms and also of any real chance for economic development.
        (Machlup cited in Slobodian, 2018: 146)              
      Slobodian reveals that Machlup was not alone in holding such views.
      Wilhelm Ro¨ pke, a key figure in the ordoliberal movement and fellow
      MontPelerinSocietymember, deployedsimilarargumentsinhisdefence
      ofapartheidinSouthAfrica.TheideaofpaternalismfromMillonwards,
      then, has had an unpleasant political history, but, nonetheless, Thaler
      andSunsteinseevalueinpreservingthisconcept,albeititinrevisedform.
      It is far from clear, however, how their argument for freedom of choice
      provides a corrective to a model of authority based on the real or sym-
      bolic power of the father, and which has been closely tied, in some
      instances, to the legitimation of patriarchal and colonial power. The
      question begs: if Thaler and Sunstein have no sympathy towards such
      amodelofauthority,thenwhyplacepaternalism,aconceptthattheysay
      is ‘reviled’ and ‘which is weighted down by stereotypes from popular
      culture and politics’ (2008: 5), at the heart of the nudge agenda? Why
      notsimply advancearangeof behaviouralinsights andassociated policy
      interventions without tying these to an accompanying political commit-
      ment to libertarian paternalism?                       
        The answers to these questions are not immediately apparent, for
      rather than present themselves as social conservatives who wish to
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         133     
                                                             
        reinforce the value of existing forms of male authority, Thaler and
        Sunstein see themselves as being progressive on questions of race and
        gender. To take the example of marriage, they argue that this institution
        has a ‘highly discriminatory past’ that is enmeshed in ‘sexual and racial
        inequality’ (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008: 215), largely because it has been
        controlled by the state through ‘an official licensing scheme’. In place of
        such arrangement, they argue, marriage should be abolished and civil
        unions introduced in its place (see 2008: 224) along with nudges ‘to pro-
        tect those who are most vulnerable’ (2008: 221). Thaler and Sunstein’s
        primary target here is the state, which in exercising a monopoly over
        private affairs, has, they say, created and reproduced forms of sexual
        and racial inequality that would otherwise not exist. Again, the state is
        positioned as the cause rather than the answer to such problems. Thaler
        and Sunstein’s solution is for individuals to be free to enter private part-
        nerships without state interference, and where necessary be nudged by
        behavioural experts to make such partnerships work effectively. In keep-
        ing with neoliberalism more generally, there is nothing, it seems, that
        privatization cannot fix.                            
         But why does the libertarian devolvement of state power to individual
        choices and contracts need to be accompanied by a form of authority –
        paternalism – that invokes the power of a father figure in the form of a
        choice architect? There are two possible explanations, neither of which
        aresatisfactory.First,thatThalerandSunsteinbelieve,likeKleinig,that
        thetermpaternalismcanbeusedinageneralwaytodescribeasoftform
        of power that works through the benevolence of experts rather than in
        serviceofanyparticulargroup,genderedorotherwise.Second,thatthere
        isno suchnaivetyto Thalerand Sunstein’s position, asit isguided byan
        underlying social conservatism, one that is in keeping with Friedman’s
        idealization of the family as an alternative to the state that can provide
        welfare through other means.                         
         Itisnotclearwhichoftheseexplanationsiscorrect.Itmightbeargued
        in response that to talk about paternalism, on one hand, and to assign a
        privileged role to a particular member of a household, on the other, are
        two different things, for while the prefix ‘pater-’ has gender connotations
        it does not mean that paternalism as a form of authority is used and
        invoked by Thaler and Sunstein in ways that are gendered. But if this is
        the case, then how can a concept that defines a form of male authority,
        and which makes a direct appeal to the power and wisdom of the father,
        be used in a normative but gender-neutral way? Indeed, why is it any
        moreacceptabletospeakinfavouroflibertarianpaternalismratherthan
        for libertarian patriachalism as a new form of governance. Thaler and
        Sunstein do more than use paternalism as a purely conceptual or analyt-
        ical term – they advocate it, politically, as a normative alternative to
        state-centred power and what they call ‘aggressive government planning’
        (2008: 15). Moreover, in appealing to libertarian paternalism they

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      134                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      neutralize the structural politics of gender and race by dealing with them
      as problems created by the ‘directive and exclusionary role of the state’
      (2008: 221) – problems that can then be remedied by individual or loca-
      lized behavioural interventions or nudges.             
        The limits and consequences of such an approach have been revealed
      starkly by the Covid-19 crisis, which, in the UK, has had a dispropor-
      tionate impact on BME communities, the old, and those doing caring
      work. In the face of this crisis, the UK Behavioural Insights Team has
      acknowledged that ‘structural racism affects the broader life chances of
      ethnicminoritygroupsintheUK,andthediscriminationtheyexperience
      in other areas can in turn undermine mental and physical health experi-
      ences and behaviours’ (see https://www.bi.team/blogs/the-disproportion-
      ate-impact-of-covid-19-on-ethnic-minorities-in-the-uk-and-what-we-can-
      do-about-it/). But rather than tackle the root causes of such ‘structural
      racism’,theiransweristoproducebehaviouralsolutionsfordealingwith
      its effects. The problem with such an approach is that it bypasses any
      concernforinstitutionalandstructuralformsofpowerandinequalityby
      focusing instead on the behavioural deficiencies of particular actors. To
      give an example: Sunstein, as stated above, declares that ‘insufficient
      navigability’ is a ‘pervasive problem for the poor’ (2019a: 46). But is
      poverty really a problem of ‘navigability’, a problem of individuals
      beingunabletofindtheirownwayandfailingtomaketherightchoices?
      Or, rather, is poverty a systemic property of capitalist society, and the
      product of racial, gendered, and classed forms of politics and power, the
      drivers and dynamics of which nudge economics leaves largely
      untouched?                                             
      Nudging for Good?                                      
      ThisraisesthequestionofwhatThalermeanswhenheaskschoicearchi-
      tects to ‘nudge for good’ (see Halpern, 2015: xiv). Such questions con-
      cerningthe‘good’takeusbeyondthelimitsofscienceandintoaworldof
      political values and judgements that both underpin and follow from
      Thaler and Sunstein’s commitment to libertarianism paternalism. One
      of the main presuppositions of Nudge is that freedom of consumer
      choice is necessarily a good thing, and, because of this, the state
      should not intervene in the operation of free market processes unless
      absolutely necessary, although where this threshold lies is not altogether
      clear. In their view, it is freedom of individual choice rather than the
      exercise of state power that is the most effective mechanism for limiting
      the ability of nudge experts and perhaps even big business to coerce or
      manipulate individual consumers to follow particular ends. Thaler and
      Sunstein declare that ‘Freedom to choose is the best safeguard against
      bad choice architecture’ (2008: 12), for if individuals do not like a nudge
      or a choice, then they are free to opt for something else. But is this likely
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         135     
                                                             
        given that Thaler and Sunstein’s rationale for nudging is that humans
        lack willpower and are afflicted with problems of ‘self-control’? And if
        nudges are subtle, and involve changing default options, will individuals
        even be aware that they have been nudged in the first place?
        These problems perhaps explain why Thaler and Sunstein’s commitment
        to individual freedom of choice as a ‘safeguard’ against coercion is
        accompanied by a plea for choice architects to nudge for good, as their
        work,bydesign,structurestheverybasisofthisfreedom.Butevenifthe
        call to nudge for good is well-intentioned, how can choice architects
        know for sure what is good for those they are nudging (see Brown,
        2012)? Halpern (2015: 187–97), for example, writes at length about the
        benefitsofusinge-cigarettes,butthelong-termrisksofusingthemarefar
        from clear. Elsewhere, Sunstein (2019b: xii) argues that there is good
        reason for a state ban or mandate to be imposed on trans fats, but
        what about other instances in which consumer choices are riddled with
        known unknowns? Who knows, for example, what the long-term effects
        are of consuming genetically modified foods, chlorinated chicken, or
        crops treated with new pesticides? And in the face of the latest crisis,
        can behavioural interventions designed to promote ‘herd immunity’ be
        surethattheywillprovidealong-termsolutiontoCovid-19,onethatwill
        justify the deaths of those who are old, weak, and/or poor that will
        necessarily come as a consequence?                   
         The answer appears to be that we should place trust in the expertise
        and judgement of the choice architect, as well as their capacity to nudge
        for good. In Nudge, it is the humanness of individual actors rather than
        consumersocietymoregenerallythatisidentifiedastheproblem,andthe
        solution that follows is to make these actors into subjects that can make
        better choices from which they will benefit – this is the essence of what
        Thaler and Sunstein call ‘nudging for good’. But there are at least two
        problems here. First, how can we know that choice architects will not be
        afflicted by the same behavioural biases as the subjects they seek to
        nudge, or does their expert knowledge of behavioural science mean
        that they are largely immune to the irrationalities of their own human-
        ness? And second, while Thaler and Sunstein are vocal in their criticism
        of thecoercive powerofthe state,theysaycomparatively little aboutthe
        potential forcommercial organizations to use nudgesfor theirownends.
        This is remarkable given that techniques of nudging have long been used
        bycommercial agencies to influence consumer behaviourwith the aim of
        maximizing profits: from the successes of marketing and branding
        through to product placement and the design of shop-floors to increase
        consumer spending (see Jones et al., 2013: viii). This ability to nudge
        consumers is considered in detail by Shoshana Zuboff in her landmark
        book The Age of Surveillance Capitalism (2019), which brings this issue
        into the digital age by considering the online ‘nudging’, ‘herding’ and
        ‘conditioning’ of consumers in order to boost commercial interests by

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      136                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      marrying ‘behaviour modification and the technological means to auto-
      mate its application’ (Zuboff, 2019). The key point is that while digital
      architecturesand platforms mightappearto bevalue-neutral, orbemar-
      ketedasworkingfortheindividualandsocialgood,closeattentionneeds
      to be paid to values embedded with them, and the ends to which they
      operate.                                               
        Skeggs and Yuill make exactly this point about social media technol-
      ogies such as Facebook, which work through algorithms that are funda-
      mentally ideological because they create ‘value through capture and
      connectivity, maximizing their own potential through operations on
      themselves, as they model users and relationships’ (2016a: 1368). The
      ability for social media technologies such as Facebook to nudge users
      towards making particular economic and political choices has been well-
      documented following the Cambridge Analytica scandal, which received
      mass public attention following the 2019 film The Great Hack. But
      Skeggs and Yuill argue, further, that such platforms are ideological in
      less obvious ways because they ‘lubricate the circuits of capitalism’ by
      influencing social networks over time, and, with this, how users interact
      both on and offline: ‘with whom, when, how’ (2016b: 391). In these
      terms, Facebook is the nudge architecture par excellence because it can
      influence behaviour not by adopting state-led mechanisms of coercion
      but by structuring choice itself: its power is effectively in its platform. As
      Tamsin Shaw (2017) explains, this is no accident as at the outset of the
      social media revolution figures such as Kahneman and Thaler gave mas-
      terclasses to key figures in Silicon Valley – masterclasses that led many
      companies to adopt behavioural-economic principles that aided the
      design of ‘automated machine-learned ‘‘nudges’’’ that could give them
      ‘significant business advantage’ (Shaw, 2017). Nudges, then, are not
      simply neutral devices that enable individual consumers to make better
      choices for themselves but are psychological techniques that have a his-
      tory of being used to structure choice according to strong commercial
      and political imperatives.                             
      Nudge as Neoliberalism                                 
      Thaler and Sunstein’s positioning of libertarian paternalism at the heart
      ofNudgeindicatesthatthisisnotsimplyaworkofeconomicsbutisalso,
      andperhapsforemost,apoliticalproject.Attheoutsetofthisbook,they
      claim not to align nudge philosophy with any party-political commit-
      ment, even though they state that they have little sympathy with
      Democrats who have ‘enthusiasm for aggressive government planning’
      (2008: 15). Instead, they declare that the nudge agenda is ‘neither left or
      right’, and because of this offers the potential of a new, ‘real’ third way:
      ‘one that can break through some of the least tractable debates in con-
      temporary democracies’ by working between what they call ‘rigid
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         137     
                                                             
        mandates’, on the one hand, and ‘dogmatic laissez faire’, on the other
        (2008: 254). Nudge offers an alternative because it advocates a politics of
        a different sort, one that plays out through the ideas and actions of
        experts and advisory teams that are able to influence decision-making
        both within and beyond the formal arena of party politics. Sunstein
        declares, quite openly, that ‘Those who favour nudges do not trust gov-
        ernment’(2019a:22),and henceaprimaryobjectiveof thenudgeagenda
        istochangethebasisofpoliticsandthegroundsuponwhichitproceeds.
        Nowhere is this clearer than in George Osborne and Richard Thaler’s
        (2010) commitment to ‘embed behavioural thinking throughout govern-
        ment’ that was put into practice through the early years of the
        Conservative-led coalition. The Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) was
        established in the UK at almost exactly the same time that this govern-
        ment, under the guidance of George Osborne, unveiled an aggressive
        austerity programme that was designed to roll back the extent and
        reach of the welfare state. Notably, in David Halpern’s 2015 book
        Inside the Nudge Unit, there is not a single reference to this programme
        in spite of the fact that the unit he headed (and which had been advised
        by Thaler) was at that time located in the Cabinet Office. Instead,
        Halpern sings the praises of the BIT and the ‘millions of healthy life
        years’ it helped save, arguing that behavioural solutions are required to
        tackle ‘entrenched poverty’ because the ‘world and challenges we face
        have changed’ (Halpern, 2015: 342–50).               
         It is important to remember, however, how the world, and in particu-
        lartheUK,changedundertheausteritypoliciesofthisperiod.Itisworth
        citing the work of Bev Skeggs at length, who, writing in the same year as
        Halpern, provides a stark account of their impact:   
         in the UK in the last few years there have been £18 billion cuts to
         the welfare budget, leading to the establishment of 423 food banks
         in Britain which feed 913,138 people including 330,205 children.
         How can the existence of class be denied when the real incomes
         for the poorest have fallen 40 per cent, and 33 per cent of families
         lack basic resources, and where the longest depression of wages
         since 1979 has occurred and the cost of living has risen by 25 per
         centinthelast5years,and wherethetop10percent ofhouseholds
         intheUKarenow850timeswealthierthanthebottom10percent?
         Thisisintheseventhrichestcountryintheworldwheretherichare
         gettingricher,andwherethetoprateofincometaxhasbeenhalved
         (itwas83percentin1979)fortherichest.Britain’srichestincreased
         their wealth by £69 billion in 2014 alone. (Skeggs, 2015: 206–7)
        Halpern himself presents nudge economics as something that is in keep-
        ingwithausteretimes,ashewritesthat‘behaviouralinsightshaveproven
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      138                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      to bean effective tool to help refine and improve thecost-effectiveness of
      policies’ (2015: 333), while at the same time insisting that such insights
      can improve public services and empower those that use them. Such
      insights, however, were introduced in the UK against a backdrop of a
      sustained attack on public services and on the welfare state more gener-
      ally, with the consequence that responsibilities were passed downwards
      to individuals with the expectation that they look after themselves, only
      with fewer material resources to do so. Is such an attack on the welfare
      state in keeping with the libertarian commitments of Thaler and
      Sunstein’s soft paternalism? Yes, for the very essence of libertarian pol-
      itics, regardless of how soft they might be, is that the individual and the
      private are the sources of all things good. Hence, state support is neither
      desirable nor necessary, and in its place choice architects should guide
      people to care better for themselves. In this sense, austerity politics and
      libertarian paternalism are well-matched to each other, with the latter
      seeking to provide individualized solutions to the social problems gener-
      ated by the former.                                    
        What type of politics, then, is at stake in libertarian paternalism? An
      initial clue can be found in the figures that Thaler and Sunstein draw
      upon to formulate their brand of paternalism, which include Friedrich
      Hayek (the ‘greatest critic of socialism’; Sunstein, 2019a: 21) and Milton
      Friedman (or, as Thaler (2015: 51) calls him, ‘Uncle Miltie’). Nudge
      theory might appear, at first sight, to work outside of existing neoliberal
      frameworks as it mixes an argument for individual consumer freedoms
      with a new form of paternalism based on psychological interventions of
      different types. But, on closer inspection, libertarian paternalism is neo-
      liberal to its core, as among other things, it: aims to limit the powers
      of the state to impose mandates and bans that restrict the extent and
      reach of corporate power; positions the individual consumer as sover-
      eign, thereby dispensing with any explicit concern for collective social
      properties of any type; treats the underlying structure of life-choice as
      psychological rather than social in basis and thus as something that can
      be remedied through small behavioural interventions; conceptualizes
      freedom in economic terms as consumer freedom or freedom of con-
      sumer choice; empowers a new breed of behavioural experts to work
      outside of party politics but, nonetheless, retain political influence on
      the grounds that their insights are grounded in science and therefore
      politically neutral; passes responsibilities downwards from the state to
      individuals by helping them to make ‘better’ choices for themselves;
      advocates new forms of governance that are informed by principles
      drawnfromconsumerpsychology,andwhicharetoapplytogovernment
      itself; and operates, in the UK at least, as the partner to an austerity
      programme designed to roll back the extent and reach of the welfare
      state. But whereas neoliberalism, as conventionally understood, is a
      state project (see, for example, Foucault, 2008: 84), the nudge agenda

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         139     
                                                             
        shifts attention from the state to the governance of individuals. In so
        doing, Nudge departs from more traditional forms of libertarianism on
        the grounds that free markets do not govern themselves. This is not
        because the state is needed to protect market freedoms and inject a
        spirit of competition into all aspects of social life, as suggested by
        Foucault in his lectures on ordoliberalism, but because individual
        market actors, with all their irrationalities, cannot be governed, or as
        Sunstein terms it, disciplined by market dynamics and processes. For
        this, another form of neoliberal governance is needed – the nudge –
        which, as McMahon succinctly puts it, seeks to ‘fix individuals for the
        market’ (2015: 149).                                 
         It is little surprise, then, that the nudge agenda has flourished in the
        wake of the financial crisis –a crisis which, for neoliberals, resulted not
        from the failures of markets per se but from the irrationalities of market
        participants and/or government interventions (George Osborne and
        Richard Thaler (2010), in particular, pinpoint the failures of Blair-
        Brown’s Labour government, under which the financial crisis in the
        UK initially played out). At a deeper level, John McMahon argues
        that nudge economics combines aspects of the two main trajectories of
        neoliberal reason documented by Foucault in his biopolitics lectures:
        German ordoliberalism and Chicago School neoliberalism. In terms of
        the former, McMahon argues that Nudge seeks to ‘render the entire
        social field intelligible through economic analysis’ (2015: 149), while at
        the same time, in terms of the latter, enhancing human capital by produ-
        cing a more rational homo economicus – one closer to what Foucault
        (2008) calls an ‘entrepreneurial self’. In practice, however, Thaler and
        Sunstein’spositionismorecomplexthanthis,for,likeHayek,theyreject
        the figure of homo economicus as an empirical reality, but, unlike him,
        retain it in the background as an ideal towards which individual subjec-
        tivities can becorrected bytheinterventions of behavioural experts. This
        emphasis on the role of such experts is at odds with Hayek’s view that
        humanrationalityandknowledgeislimitedbyitsverynature,andhence
        that we should look to markets rather than to government officials or
        agencies for guidance. Instead, Thaler and Sunstein edge closer to
        Chicago School theories of human capital, for if individuals can be
        nudged to make the right decisions, they can, as a result, increase the
        value of their own stock.                            
         Viewedinthisway,thenudgeagendaislessaformof‘post-neoliberal-
        ism’thananew,hybridformofneoliberalismthatdrawsfrom,butatthe
        same time transcends, the trajectories of neoliberal reason outlined by
        Foucault in his biopolitics lectures. It offers something new from previ-
        ousandexisting formsofneoliberalism asitdoesnotcentreexplicitly on
        themarketizationofthestate(althoughbehaviouralinsightshaveclearly
        applied to state activities under the rationale of making them more cost-
        effective), as in ordoliberalism, or on the building of institutions such as

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      140                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      trade organizations (Slobodian, 2018). Rather, the purpose of nudge
      economics is to address the market deficiencies of individual consumers
      by developing new forms of behavioural governance. When Wendy
      Brown speaks of neoliberal ‘techniques of governance’ that operate
      through forms of ‘soft power’ (2015: 35), Nudge is crucial as it works
      by addressing the subjective ‘internalities’ that neither state coercion nor
      market forces, for Thaler and Sunstein, are able to correct. As John
      McMahon writes: ‘Behavioural economics... seeks not to challenge or
      defythemarketbuttoprovidetweakssoastobetterassimilatealltothe
      market; it captures the irrationality of economic actors and disciplines
      thatirrationalitytothefunctioningofthemarket’(2015:146).Thenudge
      agenda can be understood as the latest incarnation of the neoliberal
      project: onethatdraws partly fromlibertarian free-market individualism
      and partly from a neo-conservative commitment to paternalism, and
      which, seemingly unbeknownst to itself, both builds upon and rejects
      ideas from previous Austrian, German and North American trajectories
      of neoliberalism. This form of neoliberalism is concerned with the fail-
      ures of human subjects and of governments, and how these can be gov-
      erned and potentially corrected to be better market actors through the
      application of behavioural understandings and principles. Nudge eco-
      nomics, in the form expressed by Thaler and Sunstein, is, then, not just
      a technical exercise aimed at providing individuals with better means for
      pursuing goals of their choosing; it is fundamentally a political project.
      This project is guided by an ideal of libertarian paternalism that treats
      individual market freedom as the basis of all freedom, and which
      bypasses concern for the structural inequalities – be these of class,
      gender, or race – of contemporary capitalist society by shifting attention
      to what are seen as the irrational and misguided choices of individuals.
      Thismeans,asaconsequence,thatinanageinwhichnudgeeconomicsis
      flourishing, such inequalities continue to thrive, not least because,
      increasingly, these inequalities are individualized and are dealt with in
      terms of their effects rather than by confronting and addressing their
      underlying causes.                                     
      Acknowledgements                                       
      Early versions of this article were presented at the University of Washington and the
      University of Helsinki in October 2019. I would like to thank the participants of these
      eventsandtheanonymousreviewersatTCSfortheirdetailedcommentsandcriticisms,
      which were helpfulin revising thisarticle forfinalpublication.
      ORCID iD                                               
      NicholasGane https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8102-6509     
      References                                             
      Anderson,J.(2010)ReviewofNudge.EconomicsandPhilosophy26(3):369–406.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Gane                                         141     
                                                             
        Brown,D.(2014)ReviewofWhyNudge?FinancialTimes,4May.Available at:
         https://www.ft.com/content/3421a0be-cece-11e3-8e62-00144feabdc0
         (accessed 22 February 2021).                        
        Brown,P.(2012)Anudgeintherightdirection?.SocialPolicyandSociety11(3):
         305–317.                                            
        Brown, W. (2015) Undoing the Demos. New York: Demos. 
        Claeys, G. (2013) Mill and Paternalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.                                              
        Cooper, M. (2017) Family Values. New York: Zone.     
        Curchin, K. (2016) Using behavioural insights to argue for a stronger social
         safety net. Journal of Social Policy 46(2): 231–249.
        Davies, W. (2014) The Limits of Neoliberalism. London: SAGE.
        Foucault, M. (2008) The Birth of Biopolitics. Basingstoke: Palgrave.
        Friedman, M. and Friedman, R. (1980) Free to Choose. New York: Houghton
         Mifflin Harcourt.                                   
        Giddens, A. (1998) The Third Way. Cambridge: Polity. 
        Halpern, D. (2015) Inside the Nudge Unit. London: W.H. Allen.
        Hansen,P.(2016)Thedefinitionofnudgeandlibertarianpaternalism.European
         Journal of Risk Regulation 7(1): 155–174.           
        Hayek, F. (1951) John Stuart Mill and Harriet Taylor. Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press.                                      
        John, P., et al. (2009) Nudge nudge, think think. The Political Quarterly 80(3):
         361–369.                                            
        Jones, R., Pykett, J. and Whitehead, M. (2013) Changing Behaviours.
         Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.                           
        Kleinig, J. (1983) Paternalism. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
        Leggett, W. (2014) The politics of behaviour change. Policy & Politics 42(1):
         3–19.                                               
        McMahon, J. (2015) Behavioral economics as neoliberalism. Contemporary
         Political Theory 14(2): 137–158.                    
        Mead, L. (1992) The New Politics of Poverty. New York: Basic.
        Mead,L.(ed.)(1997)TheNewPaternalism.Washington,DC:BrookingsInstitution.
        Mead, L. (2009) Econs and humans. Claremont Review of Books, 18 May.
         Available at: https://www.claremont.org/crb/article/econs-and-humans/
         (accessed 22 February 2021).                        
        Mead, L., et al. (1997) From Welfare to Work. London: IEA.
        Mill, JS. (1991) On Liberty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
        Mises von, L. (1985) Liberalism. New York: Cobden.   
        Osborne, G. and Thaler, R. (2010) Wecan makeyou behave. The Guardian,28
         January. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/
         jan/28/we-can-make-you-behave (accessed 22 February 2021).
        Pykett, J. (2012) The new maternal state. Antipode 44(1): 217–238.
        Shaw, T. (2017) Invisible manipulators of your mind. New York Review of
         Books, 20 April.                                    
        Skeggs, B. (2015) Introduction: Stratification or exploitation, domination, dis-
         possession and devaluation?. Sociological Review 63: 205–222.
        Skeggs, B. and Yuill, S. (2016a) The methodology of a multi-model project
         examining how Facebook infrastructures social relations. Information,
         Communication and Society 19(10): 1356–1372.        

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      142                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Skeggs, B. and Yuill, S. (2016b) Capital experimentation with person/a forma-
        tion. Information, Communication and Society 19(3): 380–396.
      Slobodian, Q. (2018) Globalists. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Sunstein, C. (2014) Why Nudge? New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Sunstein, C. (2019a) On Freedom. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Sunstein, C. (2019b) How Change Happens. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Thaler, R. (2015) Misbehaving. New York: Norton.       
      Thaler,R.andSunstein,C.(2003)Libertarianpaternalism.AmericanEconomic
        Review 93(2): 175–179.                               
      Thaler, R. and Sunstein, C. (2008) Nudge. New Haven: Yale University Press.
      Zuboff, S. (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. London: Profile.
      Nicholas Gane is Professor of Sociology at the University of Warwick,
      UK. His recent publications includearticles oncompetition, debt, usury,
      and the history of neoliberalism.                      
                                                             
      This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘Post-
      Neoliberalism?’, edited by William Davies and Nicholas Gane.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             