[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Energy & Society                      
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2014,Vol.31(5)21–40
        Regime   Resistance                                  
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2014
                                             Reprintsandpermissions:
        against  Low-Carbon                                  
                                        sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276414531627
        Transitions:  Introducing               tcs.sagepub.com
        Politics and  Power   into                           
        the Multi-Level                                      
        Perspective                                          
        Frank W Geels                                        
        Universityof Manchester andKingAbdulaziz University  
                                                             
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        Whilemoststudiesoflow-carbon transitionsfocusongreenniche-innovations,this
        paper shifts attention to the resistance by incumbent regime actors to fundamental
        change.Drawingoninsightsfrompoliticaleconomy,thepaperintroducespoliticsand
        power into the multi-level perspective. Instrumental, discursive, material and insti-
        tutional forms of power and resistance are distinguished and illustrated with exam-
        ples from the UK electricity system. The paper concludes that the resistance and
        resilienceofcoal,gasandnuclearproduction regimescurrentlynegatesthebenefits
        from increasing renewables deployment. It further suggests that policymakers and
        manytransition-scholarshavetoohighhopesthat‘green’innovationwillbesufficient
        to bring aboutlow-carbon transitions. Future agendas inresearch and policy should
        thereforepaymuchmoreattentiontothedestabilizationanddeclineofexistingfossil
        fuel regimes.                                        
        Keywords                                             
        climate change, electricity, incumbent regimes, resistance, transitions
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Climate Change and Socio-Technical Transitions       
                                                             
        A recent report by the International Energy Agency warns that: ‘The
        world is not on track to meet the target agreed by governments
        to limit the long-term rise in the average global temperature to
        2 degrees Celsius’ (2013: 9). In May 2013 carbon-dioxide levels exceeded
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:FrankWGeels.Email:frank.geels@mbs.ac.uk
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org        
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 1. Energy-related carbon-dioxide emissionsbycountry(from: Redrawingthe Energy
      Climate Map, World Energy Outlook Special Report(cid:2)OECD/IEA, 2013,fig. 1.11,p.30, source:
      Boden etal., 2013).                                    
                                                             
      400 parts per million, moving steadily towards the 450ppm threshold
      that, according to climate scientists, should not be passed in order to
      have a 50 per cent chance of reaching the 2-degree target. Despite the
      1997Kyotoprotocolandvariousotherclimatechangepoliciesinthelast
      20 years, global carbon-dioxide emissions have continued to rise (Figure
      1). If present trends continue, temperature increase is predicted to be
      between 3.5 and 5.3 degrees Celsius (IEA, 2013).       
        A positive development in Figure 1 is that emissions in the United
      States and Europe have recently decreased, partly because of the reces-
      sion and the relocation of manufacturing industries to other countries,
      partlybecauseofashiftfromcoaltogas(intheUnitedStates)andpartly
      because of increasing penetration of renewable electricity (especially in
      Europe, where relative contributions increased from 12.2% in 1990 to
      22.1% in 2011). In China, India, and other non-OECD countries, how-
      ever, emissions have been rising very fast because of industrialization,
      urbanization, increasing car-based transport, increasing coal-based
      energy and dietary changes (e.g. more meat and dairy). These develop-
      ments increasingly lead to the realization that addressing climate change
      (and other environmental problems) requires transitions from existing
      fossil fuel-based energy, agro-food, and transport systems towards
      low-carbonsystemsbasedon‘green’technologies(e.g.wind,solarphoto-
      voltaic, battery-electric vehicles, bicycles, organic farming) and new
      infrastructures, user practices, policies and cultural meanings (Elzen
      et al., 2004; Verbong and Geels, 2010).                
        A popular framework to understand the dynamics of such socio-
      technical transitions is the multi-level perspective (Geels, 2002, 2012;
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        23      
                                                             
        Smithetal.,2005;GeelsandSchot,2007),whichunderstandstransitions
        as arisingfrom the interplaybetween multi-dimensional developments at
        three analytical levels: niches (the locus of radical innovations), socio-
        technical regimes (the locus of established practices and associated rules
        that enable and constrain incumbent actors in relation to existing sys-
        tems), and an exogenous socio-technical landscape.1 In a nutshell, the
        core logic is that niche-innovations build up internal momentum
        (through learning processes, price/performance improvements, and sup-
        port from powerful groups); changes at the landscape level create pres-
        suresontheregime;anddestabilizationoftheregimecreateswindowsof
        opportunity for the diffusion of niche-innovations. The alignment of
        these processes enables the breakthrough of ‘green’ innovations in main-
        stream markets where they struggle with the existing regime on multiple
        dimensions (economic, technical, political, cultural, infrastructural).
         While the MLP hasbeen usedin many analyses of ‘green’innovations
        andtransitions,therearevariousproblemsinthewaythishasbeendone.
        One criticism is the lack of explicit attention for power and politics that
        underpinthedevelopmentandimplementationofspecificpolicies(Smith
        et al., 2005; Meadowcroft, 2011). Second, because most transition-scho-
        larsfocuson‘green’niche-innovations,theypaylessattentiontoexisting
        regimes and incumbent actors, or conceptualize regimes as monolithic
        ‘barriers to be overcome’. This asymmetry runs counter to the initial
        MLP-formulations and the emphasis on multi-level alignments.2 Third,
        the stability of existing regimes is often conceptualized in terms of lock-
        in, path dependence, and inertia, sometimes with reference to Hughes’s
        (1994) metaphor of ‘technological momentum’. It is problematic, how-
        ever,toportrayregimesasfollowingNewton’ssecondlawandtosuggest
        that regime stability is automatic.                  
         Against this background, the paper focuses on existing regimes rather
        than ‘green’ niche-innovations. The specific contribution to the transi-
        tions debate is to conceptualize regime stability as the outcome of active
        resistance by incumbent actors.Furthermore, thepaper will discussvari-
        ous ways in which these actors use power and politics to resist funda-
        mental transitions to new low-carbon systems.        
         The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses how
        power and politics can be introduced into the MLP, drawing on insights
        from political economy. The subsequent section adds dynamics by dis-
        cussing four ways in which regime actors resist fundamental system
        change, using instrumental, discursive, material and institutional forms
        of power and resistance. These resistance strategies will be illustrated
        with examples from the UK electricity system in the last decade.
         TheUKwas chosenforempirical illustrationsbecause successive gov-
        ernmentshaveformulatedambitiousclimatechangetargets.TheLabour
        Party made climate change an important issue in the 1997 election cam-
        paign. In 2000, an influential report by the UK Royal Commission on

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      24                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 2. UK carbon-dioxide emissions from electricity generation,Mt(constructed from
      energystatistics datafrom Department of Energy andClimate Change,https://www.gov.uk/
      government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/193414/280313_ghg_national_
      statistics_release_2012_provisional.pdf; accessed 22July2013).
                                                             
                                                             
      Environmental Pollution further catalysed the climate change debate,
      suggesting the need for a 60 per cent reduction of GHG emissions by
      2050. The 2003 White Paper Our Energy Future: Creating a Low-Carbon
      Economy adopted climate change as a central policy problem and high-
      lightedrenewableenergyasthemostimportantlow-carbonstrategy.The
      2008 Climate Change Act, which is one of the most ambitious policy
      frameworks in the world, adopted 80 per cent reduction of greenhouse
      gas emissions as a long-term goal for 2050, compared to 1990, and a 34
      per cent reduction by 2020.                            
        Electricity production was chosen for empirical illustrations, because
      this sector makes the highest relative contribution (32%) to UK carbon-
      dioxide emissions. Furthermore, electricity production is often seen as
      the sector where most progress has been made so far, and where there is
      most scope for further carbon reductions. Relative electricity production
      from renewable sources, for instance, has increased from 4.3 per cent in
      2005 to 11.3 per cent in 2012. However, overall carbon emissions from
      electricity generation have not improved between 2000 and 2012 (Figure
      2), because of increased coal use, especially between 1999–2006 and
      2010–2012 (Figure 3) The coal regime has so far resisted climate
      change pressures through a ‘clean coal’ discourse and the innovation
      promise of carbon capture and storage (CCS). Nuclear energy actors
      also repositioned themselves as low-carbon energy, giving rise to a
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        25      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Figure 3. Fuelinput tocentralpowergeneration intheUK,million tonsof oilequivalent
        (constructed from historical electricitydata from the Department ofEnergyandClimate
        Change;www.decc.gov.uk/,accessed 22July2013).        
                                                             
        ‘nuclear renaissance’ discourse. Natural gas has similarly been able to
        gather new support from the UK government, which is gearing up to
        ‘become a leader in the shale gas revolution’ in the words of the
        Chancellor(citedinTheGuardian,19July2013).Thesebriefdescriptions
        indicate that the electricity domain is an appropriate sector to provide
        illustrations of the resilience and resistance of incumbent regimes (coal,
        gas, nuclear).                                       
         Thepaperendswithsuggestionsforanewpolicyandresearchagenda.
        Whereasmostattentionwithregardtolow-carbontransitionsfocuseson
        stimulating ‘green’ niche-innovations, this paper suggests that it is
        equally important to understand and enact the destabilization and
        decline of fossil fuel-based regimes. Phrased differently, this agenda
        would mean that we should better understand the ‘destruction’ part of
        Schumpeter’s ‘creative destruction’ concept. The analytical problem is
        that regime actors will resist this destruction, which is the topic of this
        paper. Before addressing various resistance strategies, the next section
        will first discuss ways of introducing power and politics into the MLP.
                                                             
        Introducing Power and Political Economy into the MLP 
        Thesocio-technicalregimeconceptcontains‘policy’asonedimension,in
        addition to technology, user practices, science, cultural meaning, infra-
        structure and industry (Geels, 2002). But, as critics have argued,
        the underlying politics and power have remained under-theorized.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      26                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      One reason for this relative neglect may be that the MLP draws closely
      on structuration theory, which pays insufficient attention to collective
      actors because of its emphasis on knowledgeable actors, recursive
      action and reflexivity (Mouzelis, 1995). Field-level rules and resources
      can also be shaped, however, through policing, defence or alteration
      attempts by collective actors such as industry associations, government
      departments,socialmovementorganizations,andspecial-interestgroups.
        To accommodate this in the MLP, it is useful to enrich the regime
      concept with insights from political economy, which explicitly bring in
      collective actors and allow for a differentiated view of power, which
      spans politics, economics and cultural meanings and discourses. The
      basic idea is that policymakers and incumbent firms can be conceptua-
      lizedasoftenformingacoreallianceattheregimelevel,orientedtowards
      maintaining the status quo. This alliance has been noted previously with
      concepts such as the ‘techno-institutional complex’ (Unruh, 2000) and a
      ‘historical bloc’ (Levy and Newell, 2002). Empirically, this alliance has
      also been noted for fossil fuel industries with concepts such as: a) the
      ‘minerals-energy complex’, which refers to capital accumulation by fossil
      fuelindustriessupportedbypolicymakers(FineandRustomjee,1996);b)
      ‘carbon lock-in’, which refers to the self-perpetuating inertia related to
      technical, economic and institutional aspects of fossil fuel-based energy
      systems (Unruh, 2000); c) ‘carbon capital’, which refers to fossil fuel
      configurations with economic, political, cultural and military dimensions
      of power (Urry, 2013); and d) a ‘fossil fuel historical bloc’, comprising
      fossil fuel corporations, industry representative organizations, and gov-
      ernments (Phelan et al., 2012).                        
        The underlying analytical argument is that policymakers and incum-
      bent business actors tend to form close alliances because of mutual
      dependencies. On the one hand, firms and industries depend on govern-
      ments for establishing property rights, rules of exchange (obligations of
      contracts), and general governance structures that establish legal and
      illegal forms of corporate behaviour (Fligstein, 1996). Governments
      also support and shape economic sectors in specific ways, e.g. through
      tariff protection, loans, cash grants, government purchases, patents, tax
      concessions,informationandresearchservices.Highlightingthisdepend-
      ency,Lindblom(2001:42)thereforequipsthat:‘Ifthemarketsystemisa
      dance, the state provides the dance floor and the orchestra.’
        On theother hand, capitalist societies are systematically dependent on
      economic growth, which implies that a central role of the state is to
      advance the general interests of capital (Burnham, 1990). Newell and
      Paterson (1998) argue that big business has ‘structural power’, because
      states depend on industries to provide jobs, taxes, economic growth and
      dynamism. I suggest there are, at least, three ways in which firms influ-
      ence policymakers. First, dependency leads to relational networks and
      close contacts between big business and senior policymakers, which

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        27      
                                                             
        providepolicyaccesstofirms.Withregardtofossilfuelindustries,Newell
        and Paterson (1998: 684) found that: ‘Governments routinely consult and
        take account of the interests of energy lobbies when proposals are being
        formulated.’ Second, frequent contacts may lead policymakers to intern-
        alize the ideas and interests of industries, which is a more subtle mechan-
        ism of influence. Market elites and governmental elites may haveconflicts
        about specific policy instruments but generally agree about basic direc-
        tions, problem definitions and desired solutions (Lindblom, 2001). Third,
        firms use ‘corporate political strategies’ to influence policymakers, which
        may contain information strategies, financial incentives strategy, orga-
        nized pressure strategies, direct lobbying strategy, and confrontational
        strategies such as litigation (Hillman and Hitt, 1999).
         The power of firms to shape specific policies and wider political
        debates has increased since the 1970s, first because of the emergence of
        a pro-business neo-liberal discourse, which highlights free markets, pri-
        vatization,andde-regulation,and,second,becauseofthepoliticalmobil-
        ization of corporate interests in response to social and environmental
        regulations. For the United States, Barley (2010) showed empirically
        how firms since the 1970s have rapidly expanded the creation of foun-
        dations, think tanks, political action committees, government affairs
        offices, public relation firms, and advisory committees to corral govern-
        ments and shape public opinion. In relation to increasing corporate
        power Fligstein (1996: 662) notes that ‘laws and accepted practices
        often reflect the interests of the most organized forces in society’.
        Lindblom (2001: 223) further warns that the alliance of business and
        political elites often dominates wider discourses and debates:
         Compared to those elites, the voices, say, of consumer and envir-
         onmental groups are infrequent and weak. The voice of labor
         unions, though strong in some nations, rarely speaks so frequently
         and loudly as the voices of entrepreneurial and governmental elites.
         The two elites overwhelm all other contributors to what conse-
         quently fails to become an illuminating competition of ideas.
         In sum, one way to introduce power and politics into the MLP is to
        conceptualize relations between policymakers and incumbent firms as a
        core regime level alliance, which often resists fundamental change. The
        neo-Gramscian political economy framework, developed by Levy and
        Newell (2002: 87), suggests that the alliance between policymakers and
        business can turn into a stable and hegemonic ‘historical bloc’ if it also
        achieves consensual legitimacy in civil society via widely accepted dis-
        courses. This multi-dimensional approach to power suggests that the
        stability of historical blocs derives from ‘specific alignments of material,
        organizational, and discursive formations which stabilize and reproduce
        relations of production and meaning’ (Levy and Newell, 2002: 87). With
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      regard to transitions, this multi-dimensionality means that existing
      regime actors can defend themselves and resist transitions in various
      ways,whichisthetopicofthenextsection.Thisresistanceisincreasingly
      perceived as important, as highlighted by Hess (2013: 279) in a recent
      commentary: ‘In the case of the green-energy transition in the twenty-
      first century United States, the political contestation by the incumbent
      industrialregimeissowellorganizedthatitshouldbeatthecenterofthe
      analytical framework’.                                 
                                                             
      Regime Resistance against Low-Carbon Transitions       
      Whiletheprevioussectionelaboratedgeneralprinciples,thissectionadds
      dynamics to the discussion by elaborating specific ways in which regime
      actors, particularly incumbent firms and policymakers, can use power to
      resist fundamental system change, in the context of climate change and
      low-carbon transitions. Table 1 provides an overview of various distinc-
      tions of power in relation to debates on transitions and climate change.
        Combining various distinctions, this section will discuss instrumental,
      discursive, material and institutional forms of power and resistance. The
      various resistance strategies will be illustrated with examples from the
      UK electricity sector, where coal, gas and nuclear regimes faced serious
      challenges from the 2003 White Paper (Our Energy Future) and the 2008
      Climate Change Act.                                    
        Instrumental forms of power refer to actors using resources (e.g. pos-
      itions of authority, money, access to media, personnel, capabilities) in
      immediate interactions with other actors to achievetheir goalsand inter-
      ests. Avelino and Rotmans (2009: 559) suggest that ‘the regime usually
                                                             
      Table 1. Various distinctions of power.                
      Levyand   AvelinoandRotmans                            
      Newell(2002) (2009)      Grin (2010)   Kern(2011)      
      Material  Instrumental   Relational (immediate Interests
                                interactions                 
                                betweenactors)               
      Discursive Discursive    Dispositional (related Ideas (discourse)
                                to rules,resources,          
                                actorconfigurations          
                                anddominant                  
                                images)                      
      Organizational Structuralist (material Structural (related to Institutions
                 andinstitutional) widerorders ofsig-        
                                nification, domin-           
                                ation and                    
                                legitimization)              
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        29      
                                                             
        has more power than niches, in the sense that the regime mobilizes more
        resources than niches do’.                           
         One example is that Prime Minister Tony Blair used his position and
        authoritytopushnuclearenergybackontheagenda,afterthe2003White
        Paperproclaimedthatnuclearpowerwas‘anunattractiveoptionfornew,
        carbon-free generating capacity’ and that possible future decisions to
        build new nuclear power stations would require ‘the fullest public con-
        sultation’. By 2005, Blair began calling for a ‘nuclear renaissance’ as an
        answer to climate change and rising gas and oil prices. Subsequently, a
        2006energyreview(TheEnergyChallenge)announcedplanstobuildnew
        nuclear stations over the next two decades. Greenpeace challenged these
        plans, arguing that the government had failed to engage in ‘the fullest
        public consultation’. In 2007, Greenpeace won its legal case, forcing the
        government to launch a public consultation. In advance of the consult-
        ation, however, Blair announced that he would go ahead anyway, claim-
        ingthat‘thiswon’taffectpolicyatall’.Thisexampleillustratesdirectuse
        of power and indicates that the nuclear regime enjoyed protection from
        the highest political level.                         
         Another example relates to the dubious economic performance of
        nuclearpowerplants,whichrelatesnotjusttooperatingandconstruction
        costs(andnotoriousbudgetoverrunsandconstructiondelays),butalsoto
        costsassociatedwithwastestorageandprocessing,decommissioningand
        accidentinsurance.Becauseoftheseeconomicuncertainties,utilitieshave
        not invested in nuclear power since energy sector privatization in the
        1990s. Having decided to push through nuclear power in the mid-2000s,
        politiciansfacedthedifficulttaskofpersuadingprivatefirmstoinvestand
        reassuringthepublicthatthetaxpayer’smoneywouldnotbewasted.To
        addressthistask,politiciansfirstpromisedthepublicthatnuclearenergy
        would not be subsidized, but subsequently broke this promise in negoti-
        ationswithEDF(Electricite´ deFrance),agreeingtopayahighguaranteed
        electricityprice(twicethecurrentwholesaleprice)for35years.Todisguise
        their ploy, politicians called this subsidy a ‘contract for difference’.
         Regime actors can also resist via discursive strategies, which can be
        powerful when they result in dominant discourses that shape not only
        what is being discussed (thus setting agendas) but also how issues are
        discussed. Although social movement organizations, citizens, labour
        unions and other groups also try to shape public discourses, the ‘dis-
        course coalition’ (Hajer, 1995) of policymakers and incumbent firms is
        particularly powerful in this respect (Lindblom, 2001), because of their
        positions and media access. Building on Snow and Benford (1988), I
        suggest that regime resistance can occur on three different framing
        dimensions:a)diagnosticframing,whichidentifiesanddefinesproblems;
        b) prognostic framing, which advances solutions to problems; and c)
        motivational framing, which provides a rationale for action and serves
        asa‘calltoarms’.Foreachdimension,exampleswillshowhowframings

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      30                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 4. Averagefuelprices (penceperkWh)paidbyUKpowerproducers(constructed
      from energyprice statistics datafrom theDepartment ofEnergyandClimate Change;
      https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/.../qep_mar_2013pdfhttp://www.decc.
      gov.uk/assets/decc/Statistics/publications/prices/1085-qepdec10.pdf; accessed 22July 2013).
                                                             
      have changed since the 2003 White Paper in ways that enhance the legit-
      imacy of existing regimes.                             
        The diagnostic framing changed in terms of problem definitions and
      policy goals. The 2003 White Paper portrayed climate change as the
      central problem and renewable energy as the main solution. Since
      about 2005, however, energy security and affordability (low costs) have
      been emphasized as additional, and perhaps even more important, prob-
      lems. These changes were partly related to rising oil and gas prices
      (Figure 4) and Russian gas supply problems (related to a 2005 conflict
      between Russia and Ukraine), but also benefitted existing regimes.
        Coal was increasingly (re)positioned as an answer to energy security
      andaffordability,asisvisibleintheexplanationofthetradeandindustry
      secretary (Alan Johnson) of the government’s decision to stimulate coal:
      ‘If a new, cleaner coal generation is viable, then I think it could have an
      important part to play in making sure we have diverse generation in the
      future. Coal is easy to store and it comes from a variety of well-estab-
      lished sources around the world’ (reported in The Guardian,21 February
      2006). Low prices also made utilities more interested in coal, leading to
      increased coal use between 1999–2006 and 2010–2012 (Figure 3).
        Nuclear power, in turn, became framed as a possible answer to energy
      security and climate change. For example, David King, the
      Government’sChiefScientificAdvisor,arguedthat:‘Weneedindigenous
      sources so we don’t rely on imported gas from Russia.... Indigenous
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        31      
                                                             
        supplies include all renewables and nuclear. Relying on renewable
        sources to replace lost capacity when existing nuclear power stations
        close would be a tough challenge’ (reported in The Guardian, 21
        October 2005).                                       
         These discursive changes became embedded in the 2007 White Paper
        (Meeting the Energy Challenge), which established energy security and
        affordability as strategic policy issues besides climate change. It also
        endorsed nuclear power and carbon capture and storage (CCS) for
        fossil fuels (coal, gas) as low-carbon options, in addition to renewables.
         Affordability, jobs, and employment have gained salience since the
        financial-economic crisis. These new concerns have been used to criticize
        renewable options, as noted by Pearson and Watson (2012: 31): ‘The
        public debate about energy has started to focus on the costs of the low
        carbon transition’. These concerns are also used to legitimate increasing
        use ofcheap coal since 2010and the UK’snew focus onshale gaswhich,
        according to the Chancellor, ‘has the potential to create thousands of
        jobs and keep energy bills low for millions of people’ (cited in The
        Guardian, 19 July 2013). These examples indicate that the diagnostic
        discourse (problems and goals) has changed in favour of coal, gas and
        nuclear regimes.                                     
         In the autumn of 2013, consumer bill rises of 8–10 per cent led to a
        rapidpoliticizationoftheenergydebate,afterLabourpromisedtofreeze
        energybillsfor20monthsifitwaselectedin2015.Althoughthepolitical
        discourse initially focused on pricing policies of utilities, the government
        and electricity firms managed to reorient the debate towards green levies
        and eco-efficiency programmes, which were subsequently scrapped,
        delayed or watered down in exchange for utilities promising to cut
        energy bills by £50. So, the politicization of energy bills and fuel poverty
        ledtoasubstantialweakeningofgreenambitionsandpolicies,whichfits
        well with vested regime interests.                   
         The prognostic framing changed in the sense that renewable energy,
        whichthe2003WhitePaperadvocatedasthemainsolution,wasincreas-
        ingly positioned as one of the options besides nuclear energy and CCS
        (for coal and gas), for instance, in the 2007 White Paper. Another, more
        subtle dimension of the new framing was that the proposed solutions
        (including large offshore windparks) mainly entail large-scale technical
        options, which fit relatively well with the practices and interests of uti-
        lities and national governments. Other potential transition pathways are
        side-lined or marginalized on policy agendas (both in terms of attention
        and funding). One such alternative pathway consists of civil society ini-
        tiatives, for example the Transition Towns movement in which citizens
        develop local projects (e.g. low-carbon lifestyles, eco-housing projects,
        local car-sharing projects) in response to climate change and peak oil
        concerns. The Transition Town movement started in 2007 in the UK,
        and now claims to encompass more than 400 projects in many countries.

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      AnotherexamplearethehundredsofUK communityenergyprojects, in
      which local neighbourhoods develop initiatives to generate their own
      energy with wind turbines, solar panels, and biomass digestion (Walker
      and Devine-Wright, 2008).                              
        Urban initiatives form another kind of alternative transition pathway
      (Bulkeley, 2010), focusing, for example, on co-generation of heat and
      power (e.g. Aberdeen, Birmingham, Milton Keynes) or on local renew-
      able energy generation with wind turbines or biomass digestion (e.g.
      Birmingham, London, Manchester). These urban initiatives, of which
      there are dozens in the UK, are enacted by professional actors such as
      transport planners, urban planners, and civil engineers employed by
      public works departments, who can act as ‘system builders’ in specific
      localities. Bothalternativepathwaysconcern transitions‘ontheground’,
      entailing interactions between firms, citizens, policymakers, and social
      movements.Thesepathwaysfocuslesson‘upstream’large-scaletechnol-
      ogies and more on reconfiguring local energy and transport systems.
      These alternative transition pathways receive less attention and
      resources,whichshowsthatthedominantprognosticdiscourseprivileges
      the interests of centralized incumbent actors rather than those of less
      organized and local actors.3                           
        The motivational framing changed in the sense that public concerns
      about climate change have weakened since the financial-economic crisis.
      Aword-countanalysisofBritishnewspapers(Figure5)showsthatpublic
                        normalized: max=1                    
                                                             
        1.0                                                  
                                                             
                                                             
        0.8                                                  
                                                             
        0.6                                                  
                                                             
        0.4                                                  
                                                             
                                                             
        0.2                                                  
                                                             
        0.0                                                  
           0991 1991 2991 3991 4991 5991 6991 7991 8991 9991 0002 1002 2002 3002 4002 5002 6002 7002 8002 9002 0102 1102
      32                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
               The Guardian                                  
               The Times                                     
               The Independent                               
               Daily Express                                 
      Figure 5. Yearlynumberof articlesinUK nationalnewspapers containingthewords
      ‘climate change’.                                      

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        33      
                                                             
        attentiontoclimatechangeincreasedfrom2004to2008–2009,fuelledby
        events such as Hurricane Katrina (2005), Al Gore’s movie An
        Inconvenient Truth (2006), the Stern Review (2006), and the Fourth
        Assessment Report from the International Panel on Climate Change
        (2007). But public attention subsequently nose-dived, because of con-
        cerns about austerity and unemployment. A public attitudes survey by
        the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change (March, 2012) con-
        firms that most citizens now worry more about economic issues than
        about climate change. The sense of urgency and motivation to enact a
        low-carbon transition has similarly decreased, with policymakers now
        paying more attention to issues such as the costs of energy transitions,
        energy prices and new jobs, which are promised in relation to shale gas.
         Oneindicationofthechangeinmotivationismountingcriticismofthe
        2008 Climate Change Act, which enshrined ambitious carbon targets in
        law. Chancellor George Osborne, for instance, argued at the
        Conservative Party conference (2–5 October 2011) that the UK should
        not pursue green policies that would ‘pile costs on the energy bills of
        households and companies’ and might put the country ‘out of business’.
        He further suggested that the UK’s post-2020 carbon targets should be
        subject to review and pledged that the UK should not cut carbon emis-
        sionsfasterthanotherEuropeancountries.Anotherindicationisthaton
        21November2013PrimeMinisterCameronapparentlyorderedhisaides
        to ‘get rid of all the “green crap”’ (i.e. green levies and eco-efficiency
        programmes) to reduce energy bills. Both examples are not just indica-
        tions of weakening political motivation, but also an instance of the
        common tactic to use economic problems to argue for a weakening of
        social or environmental policies.4                   
         Regime actors can also defend themselves with material strategies,
        drawing on technical capabilities and financial resources to improve
        the technical dimension of socio-technical regimes. These technical
        innovation efforts are often accompanied by promises and discourses
        (Van Lente, 1993), which can be used to attract attention and resources
        from external funders or to ward off possible regulation by promising
        that solutions are ‘just around the corner’.5        
         A salient example concerns technical innovation in coal-fired power
        generation, e.g. flue gas desulfurization devices, supercritical pulverized
        coal technologies, coal gasification, and carbon capture and storage
        (CCS). These innovations, particularly CCS, gave rise to a ‘clean coal’
        discourse, which the government used to legitimate its support for coal.
        Although CCS is now technically feasible, there is much uncertainty
        about commercial viability. Utilities are not keen to deploy the technol-
        ogyandlookforgovernmentsupportandhand-outs(Bowen,2011).The
        2007WhitePaperthereforeprovideda£1billionsubsidyforalarge-scale
        CCS demonstration programme. In 2008, four consortia (Peel Energy,
        BP, E.ON, Scottish Power) showed an interest in participation. But

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      subsequent negotiations proved difficult and, in October 2011, the last
      consortium pulled out. Nevertheless, the government continues to
      assume that CCS will diffuse widely in the coming years. Opponents,
      however, argue that CCS is a technological promise that will never
      materialize and is used to delay carbon abatement. The latest part of
      this controversy is the proposal by CCS proponents that new-built coal
      plants can be designed to be ‘capture-ready’, so that firms can add CCS
      when it becomes feasible in the future (Bowen, 2011). But opponents see
      this as a flimsy promise, which the industry uses to get permits to build
      new coal-fired plants. They fear that ‘capture-ready’ plants will never
      retrofit CCS because of the high costs involved. So far, however, CCS
      andassociatedpromiseshaveeffectivelydefendedcoal-firedpowerplants
      against climate change threats.                        
        The fourth kind of resistance relates to broader institutional power,
      which is embedded in political cultures, ideology and governance struc-
      tures.Thesewiderinstitutionalcontextsfacilitatethestrategiesofincum-
      bent actors and thus assist regime resistance. For example, the UK has a
      liberal market economy (Hall and Soskice, 2001) in which the perceived
      role of the state is limited to rule-setting and where coordination of
      activities occurs mainly via market competition. The presumed failure
      of ‘picking winners’ in the 1970s and 1980s led to a preference for the
      market to decide about innovations, including low-carbon options.
      While this ideological hands-off approach sounds neutral, it in effect
      means that the government privileges powerful regime actors with
      more capabilities, financial resources and established market positions.
      It also means that the government is reluctant to take action when
      market trends go in ‘wrong’ directions, e.g. when price developments
      (Figure4)leadutilitiestosteeplyincreasetheircoaluse,ashashappened
      since 2010 (Figure 3), even though this development clearly undermines
      carbon reduction efforts.                              
        Theliberalmarketeconomyalsomeansthatpolicymakerssympathize
      withbusinessesandoftenidentifywiththeirgoalsandproblems.Thisfits
      well with a UK policy culture, which Bailey (2007) characterizes as a
      paternalistic and technocratic style of decision-making dominated by
      techno-economic arguments and cost-benefit analyses; informal consult-
      ation networks that give industry groups privileged positions as pro-
      viders of technical knowledge and advice, with limited access for
      outsiders to close-knit policy networks. This policy style has made UK
      policymakers more skilful in dealing with incumbent firms and technical
      experts than with citizens, cities, and social movements, which helps
      explain why large-scale technical options receive more attention and
      funding than alternative transition pathways.          
        The political dimensions of these preferences are masked by a ‘post-
      political’ discourse, which frames climate change and low-carbon transi-
      tions as a techno-economic management challenge. This post-political

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        35      
                                                             
        discourse avoids the ‘agonistic confrontation of competing visions of a
        different socio-ecological order’ (Swyngedouw, 2010: 226), and instead
        presents the preferred pathway as the only alternative. Stirling (2010)
        criticizes this de-politicization of low-carbon transitions with reference
        to an article in The Independent (13 July 2006) by David King, the
        Government’s Chief Scientific Adviser, which was titled: ‘Why We
        Have no Alternative to Nuclear Power’. With regard to this article,
        Stirling (2010: 1624) argues that: ‘The crucial role for deliberate social
        choice is seriously downplayed by current official and incumbent dis-
        courses in energy policy. Senior figures routinely understate the scope
        for agency, for instance promoting nuclear strategies for the
        paradoxically contradictory reasons that there is “no alternative”.’ So,
        while claiming to follow neutral expert advice, the government often
        supports low-carbon options that fit incumbent interests.
         Thispost-politicaltechnocraticstylethereforefavoursexistingregimes
        and makes it difficult to open up choices for wider political and cultural
        debate,whichagainhelpsexplainwhyalternativetransitionpathwaysare
        side-lined. In the second half of 2013, energy policy suddenly became
        highlypoliticized,firstbecauseofheatedlocaloppositionagainstfracking
        and shale gas, and second because of a controversy about energy bills.
        Neither issue did, however, lead to an open debate about different low-
        carbon futures. With regard to shale gas the government pushed ahead,
        dismissing opponents as uninformed NIMBY-activists (‘not in my back-
        yard’),andattemptingto‘bribe’localauthoritiesbypromisingthem1per
        cent of revenues. With regard to energy bills, both Labour and the
        Conservative Party tried to position themselves as being on the side of
        consumers, promising a price freeze or reduction, rather than using the
        concernstostartabroaderdebateaboutprosandcons,costsandbenefits
        oflow-carbonenergytransitions.Despitethepoliticalheat,bothdebates
        thus remained technocratic, closed in terms of participation, and narrow
        in terms of framing, which suited existing regime actors.
        Conclusions and Wider Implications                   
        The previous discussion has shown how incumbent regime actors in the
        UK have used instrumental, discursive, material and institutional forms
        of power to resist climate change-related pressures and to reposition
        themselves for low-carbon futures without fundamental system change.
        Thediscussionalsoshowedtheusefulnessofthepaper’scontributionsto
        the socio-technical transitions debate: 1) seriously studying regime
        dynamics, rather than focusing only on green niche-innovations; 2) con-
        ceptualizing existing regime actors as actively resisting fundamental
        change, rather than as locked-in and inert; and 3) introducing power
        and politics into the MLP, both in a general sense, by articulating rela-
        tions between incumbent firms and policymakers at the regime level, and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      inaspecificsense,bydistinguishingfourwaysinwhichregimeactorscan
      mobilize power to resist fundamental change.           
        To finish the paper, I discuss wider empirical implications for low-
      carbon transition and implications for future research. With regard to
      low-carbontransitionsintheUKelectricitysystem,thepaperhasshown
      that the resistance and resilience of fossil fuel regimes largely negated
      positive developments such as increasing power generation from renew-
      ables. This finding also has relevance for global electricity generation,
      where coal-fired generation increased by 45 per cent between 2000 and
      2010 to almost 8700 TWh, leaving coal as the main source of electricity
      generation by far. Despite climate change debates and policies, coal’s
      relative contribution to electricity generation expanded from 39 per
      cent in 2000 to 42 per cent in 2010 (IEA, 2013). Renewable electricity
      sources have so far been mainly additional to fossil fuels with no (or
      limited) substitution effects. So, the resistance of existing regimes is
      clearly hindering the progress of low-carbon transitions. Although cli-
      mate change has been a high-level policy issue since the 1997 Kyoto
      protocol, carbon-dioxide emissions continue to increase, leading the
      International Energy Agency (2013) to conclude that the world is not
      on track to meet the 2-degree target. Despite this policy failure, incum-
      bent regime actors such as national governments and utilities remain
      firmly committed to nuclear, gas and coal (with the promise of CCS).
        Theresistanceandexpansionoffossilfuelregimesisamajorproblem,
      because they rapidly consume the remaining ‘carbon budget’. Climate
      scientists have calculated that carbon-dioxide concentrations should stay
      below450partspermillion(ppm)tohavea50percentchanceofstaying
      below the 2-degree target (Berners-Lee and Clark, 2013). The remaining
      ‘carbon budget’ associated with 450ppm is about 1440 Gt of carbon-
      dioxide, of which 420 Gt has already been emitted between 2000 and
      2011 (International Energy Agency, 2013). Because another 136 Gt is
      estimated to be emitted from non-energy-related sources before 2050
      (e.g. from agriculture), the remaining budget is about 884 Gt carbon-
      dioxideby2050(InternationalEnergyAgency,2013).Thebigproblemis
      that the world’s proven fossil fuel reserves are much larger than the 884
      Gt carbon budget, namely about 2800 Gt (International Energy Agency,
      2013), with about 1870 Gt coal, 610 Gt oil, and 410 Gt gas.6 So, the
      resistance of existing fossil fuel regimes is a major threat, because if the
      world burns all these reserves, the 2-degree target will be far exceeded
      (Berners-Lee and Clark, 2013).                         
        In terms of conceptual and policy agendas this means that discussions
      oflow-carbontransitionshouldnotjustfocusonstimulating‘green’alter-
      natives but also on preventing existing fossil fuel reserves from being
      burned or on stimulating the widespread adoption of CCS. At present,
      policymakers (and many academics) have high (probably unrealistic)
      hopesthat‘green’innovationwillbesufficienttobringaboutlow-carbon

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        37      
                                                             
        transitions. While stimulating green alternatives remains important, a
        strong focus on new innovations may serve to protect existing regimes
        by detracting attention from the fossil fuel burning problem. So, an
        important topic for future research is to better understand not just
        regime resistance but also the destabilization and decline of existing
        regimes, i.e. the ‘destruction’ part of Schumpeter’s ‘creative destruction’
        concept(seeTurnheimandGeels,2013,forinitialconceptualizationsand
        research). While Schumpeter mainly saw new technologies as drivers of
        creativedestruction,Isuggestthatsocio-politicalstruggleswithfossilfuel
        companiesandotherincumbentfirms(e.g.electricutilities,carcompanies)
        will be crucial in the case of low-carbon transitions. In fact, politically-
        inspired regime destabilization may be necessary to create opportunities
        for the wider diffusion of renewables, which now face uphill struggles
        againstresistantregimes,asthispaperhasshown.So,ratherthanfollow-
        ing the normal ‘David versus Goliath’ storyline, in which heroic green
        innovations overthrow thegiant, this new agendawould shift theanalyt-
        ical agenda to better understand how ‘Goliath’ can be weakened, eroded
        and destabilized, to enhance the chances of green Davids.
         Anotherimportanttopicforfutureresearchistobetterunderstandthe
        rise of alternative ‘Davids’, i.e. not just upstream green electricity pro-
        duction technologies (e.g. wind, solar, bio-energy), but also broader
        socio-technical innovations such as the civil society and urban initiatives
        discussed above. This would entail a relative shift from the dominant
        STI-mode of innovation (Science, Technology and Innovation), which
        emphasizes upstream research and development investment in ‘green’
        technologies, to a DUI-mode of innovation (Doing, Using and
        Interacting) (Jensen et al., 2007), which emphasizes ‘learning by doing’,
        ‘learning by using’ and broader social interactions in green reconfigur-
        ations of concrete transport and energy systems. Although these broader
        innovationshavemoresustainabilitypromise,suchashiftinthemodeof
        innovation is likely to be resisted by incumbent regime actors, which
        underlines the importance of the topic of this paper.
        Acknowledgements                                     
        I would like to thank five reviewers, the special issue editors (John Urry and David
        Tyfield) and the TCS editors for their very insightful and constructive advice on a pre-
        viousversionofthispaper.Theunderlyingworkforthispaperhasbeensupportedbya
        grant (number 603942) from the European Commission for the research proposal
        ‘Exploring Transition Pathways to Sustainable, Low Carbon Societies’ and by the
        Centre for Innovation and Energy Demand, funded by an EPSRC/ESRC grant
        (number EP/KO11790/1).                               
        Notes                                                
        1. Themulti-levelperspective(MLP)combinesconceptsfromevolutionaryeco-
          nomics (trajectories, regimes, niches, speciation, path dependence, routines),
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      38                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
        sociology of technology (sense-making, social networks, innovation as a
        social process shaped by broader societal contexts), structuration theory
        and neo-institutional theory (rules and institutions as ‘deep structures’ on
        which knowledgeable actors draw in recursive actions) (Geels and Schot,
        2007).                                               
      2. Geels (2002: 1261), for instance, argued that: ‘To counter this bias [towards
        novelty],Ithinkmoreexplicitattentionneedstobepaidtoongoingprocesses
        at the regime and landscape level’.                  
      3. In April 2010 the government did introduce a feed-in tariff for small-scale
        renewable generation up to 5MW (e.g. solar photovoltaic and anaerobic
        digestion). But substantial cuts in August 2012 created problems for many
        small-scale initiatives.                             
      4. PennaandGeels(2012)showedthattheUScarindustry(successfully)useda
        similar tactic when it faced economic problems inthe late1970s,persuading
        the government to weaken air pollution, auto-safety and fuel economy
        regulations.                                         
      5. Penna and Geels(2012)found that USautomakers inthe 1960s arguedthat
        airpollutionregulationswerenotneeded,becausetheywerealreadyworking
        on technical solutions such asPositive Crankcase Ventilation. Zehner (2012)
        discusses how product champions of nuclear fusion over several decades
        promised that the technology would be viable in about 30 years’ time.
      6. Probable reserves and possible reserves of fossil fuels are far larger still.
      References                                             
      Avelino F and Rotmans J (2009) Power in transition: An interdisciplinary
        framework to study power in relation to structural change. European
        Journal of Social Theory 12(4): 543–569.             
      Bailey I (2007) Market environmentalism, new environmental policy instru-
        ments, and climate change policy in the United Kingdom and Germany.
        Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97(3): 530–550.
      Barley SR (2010) Building an institutional field to corral a government: A case
        to set an agenda for organization studies. Organization Studies 31(6):
        777–805.                                             
      Berners-Lee M and Clark D (2013) The Burning Question. We Can’t Burn Half
        theWorld’s Oil,CoalandGas.SoHowDoWeQuit?London: Profile Books.
      BodenT,MarlandGandAndresR(2013)Global,RegionalandNationalFossil-
        Fuel CO2 Emissions. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak
        Ridge National Laboratory, US Department of Energy, Oak Ridge,
        Tennessee.                                           
      BowenF(2011)Carboncaptureandstorageasacorporatetechnologystrategy
        challenge. Energy Policy 39(5): 2256–2264.           
      BulkeleyH(2010)Citiesandthegoverningofclimatechange.AnnualReviewof
        Environment and Resources 35: 229–253.               
      Burnham P (1990) The Political Economy of Postwar Reconstruction. London:
        Macmillan.                                           
      Elzen B, Geels FW and Green K (eds) (2004) System Innovation and the
        Transition to Sustainability: Theory, Evidence and Policy. Cheltenham:
        Edward Elgar.                                        

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Geels                                        39      
                                                             
        Fine B and Rustomjee Z (1996) The Political Economy of South Africa: From
         Minerals-Energy Complex to Industrialization. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
        Fligstein N (1996) Markets as politics: A political-cultural approach to market
         institutions. American Sociological Review 61(4): 656–673.
        GeelsFW(2002)Technologicaltransitionsasevolutionaryreconfigurationpro-
         cesses: A multi-level perspective and a case-study. Research Policy 31(8–9):
         1257–1274.                                          
        Geels FW (2012) A socio-technical analysis of low-carbon transitions:
         Introducing the multi-level perspective into transport studies. Journal of
         Transport Geography 24: 471–482.                    
        GeelsFWandSchotJW(2007)Typologyofsociotechnicaltransitionpathways.
         Research Policy 36(3): 399–417.                     
        GrinJ(2010)Understandingtransitionsfromagovernanceperspective.In:Grin
         J, Rotmans J, Schot J, Geels FW and Loorbach D (eds) Transitions to
         Sustainable Development: New Directions in the Study of Long Term
         Transformative Change. London: Routledge, pp.249–319.
        Hajer MA (1995) The Politics of Environmental Discourse: Ecological
         Modernization and the Policy Process. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
        Hall PA and Soskice D (2001) Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional
         Foundations of Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
        Hess DJ (2013) Sustainability transitions: A political coalition perspective.
         Research Policy 43(2): 278–283.                     
        HillmanAandHittM(1999)Corporatepoliticalstrategyformulation:Amodel
         of approach, participation, and strategy decisions. Academy of Management
         Review 24(4): 825–842.                              
        Hughes TP (1994) Technological momentum. In: Smith MR and Marx L (eds)
         Does Technology Drive History? The Dilemma of Technological Determinism.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.101–113.               
        InternationalEnergyAgency(2013)RedrawingtheEnergyClimateMap:World
         Energy Outlook Special Report. Paris, France.       
        JensenMB,JohnsonB,LorenzEandLundvallBA(2007)Formsofknowledge
         and modes of innovation. Research Policy 36(5): 680–693.
        Kern F (2011) Ideas, institutions and interests: Explaining policy divergence in
         fostering ‘system innovations’ towards sustainability. Environment and
         Planning C: Government and Policy 29(6): 1116–1134. 
        LevyDLandNewellP(2002)Businessstrategyandinternationalenvironmental
         governance: Toward a neo-Gramscian synthesis. Global Environmental
         Politics 2(4): 84–101.                              
        Lindblom CE (2001) The Market System. What It Is, How It Works, and What
         to Make of It. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
        Meadowcroft J (2011) Engaging with the politics of sustainability transitions.
         Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 1(1): 70–75.
        Mouzelis N (1995) Sociological Theory: What Went Wrong? Diagnoses and
         Remedies. London: Routledge.                        
        Newell P and Paterson M (1998) Climate for business: Global warming, the
         state, and capital. Review of International Political Economy 5(4): 679–704.
        Pearson P and Watson J (2012) UK Energy Policy 1980–2010: A History and
         Lessons to be Learnt. London: Parliamentary Group for Energy Studies.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      40                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      PennaCCRandGeelsFW(2012)Multi-dimensionalstrugglesinthegreeningof
        industry: A dialectic issue lifecycle model and case study. Technological
        Forecasting and Social Change 79(6): 999–1020.       
      Phelan L, Henderson-Sellers A and Taplin R (2012) The political economy of
        addressingtheclimatecrisisintheearthsystem:Underminingperverseresili-
        ence. New Political Economy 18(2): 198–226.          
      SmithA,StirlingAandBerkhoutF(2005)Thegovernanceofsustainablesocio-
        technical transitions. Research Policy 34(10): 1491–1510.
      Snow DA and Benford R (1988) Ideology, frame resonance, and participant
        mobilization. International Social Movement Research 1: 197–217.
      Stirling A (2010) Multicriteria diversity analysis: A novel heuristic framework
        for appraising energy portfolios. Energy Policy 38(4): 1622–1634.
      Swyngedouw E (2010) Apocalypse forever? Post-political populism and the
        spectre of climate change. Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3): 213–232.
      Turnheim B and Geels FW (2013) The destabilisation of existing regimes:
        Confronting a multi-dimensional framework with a case study of the
        British coal industry (1913–1967). Research Policy 42(10): 1749–1767.
      UnruhGC(2000)Understandingcarbonlock-in.EnergyPolicy28(12):817–830.
      Urry J (2013) Societies Beyond Oil: Oil Dregs and Social Futures. London: Zed
        Books.                                               
      Van Lente H (1993) Promising technology: The dynamics of expectations in
        technological development (PhD thesis, Twente University). Delft: Eburon.
      Verbong GPJ and Geels FW (2010) Exploring sustainability transitions in the
        electricity sector with socio-technical pathways. Technological Forecasting &
        Social Change 77(8): 1214–1221.                      
      Walker GP and Devine-Wright P (2008) Community renewable energy: What
        should it mean? Energy Policy 36: 497–500.           
      Zehner O (2012) Green Illusions: The Dirty Secrets of Clean Energy and the
        Future of Environmentalism. London: University of Nebraska Press.
      Frank Geels is Professor of System Innovation and Sustainability at the
      Sustainable Consumption Institute at the University of Manchester.
      Geels is Chairman of the international Sustainability Transitions
      Research Network (www.transitionsnetwork.org) and one of the
      world-leading scholars on socio-technical transitions and radical
      innovation.                                            
      This article is part of the Special Issue on Energy & Society, edited
      by David Tyfield and John Urry.                        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             