[PAGE 1]
 1112341                                                     
 research-article2022 TCS0010.1177/02632764221112341Theory, Culture & SocietyHabermas
                                                             
                                                             
       Special Issue: A New Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Reflections and Hypotheses            2022, Vol. 39(4) 145 –171
                                              © The Author(s) 2022
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       on a Further Structural                               
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121111122334411
       Transformation   of the                               
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Political Public Sphere                               
       Jürgen Habermas                                       
       University of Frankfurt                               
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article contains reflections on the further structural transformation of the public
       sphere, building on the author’s widely-discussed social-historical study, The Structural
       Transformation of the Public Sphere, which originally appeared in German in 1962 (English
       translation 1989). The first three sections contain preliminary theoretical reflections
       on the relationship between normative and empirical theory, the deliberative
       understanding of democracy, and the demanding preconditions of the stability of
       democratic societies under conditions of capitalism. The fourth section turns to the
       implications of digitalisation for the account of the role of the media in the public
       sphere developed in the original work, specifically to how it is leading to the expansion
       and fragmentation of the public sphere and is turning all participants into potential
       authors. The following section presents empirical data from German studies which
       shows that the rapid expansion of digital media is leading to a marked diminution of the
       role of the classical print media. The article concludes with observations on the threats
       that these developments pose for the traditional role of the public sphere in discursive
       opinion and will formation in democracies.            
       Keywords                                              
       capitalism, communicative legitimisation, digitalisation, normative and empirical theory,
       public sphere, structural transformation              
                                                             
       As the author of the book published nearly six decades ago and chosen by the editors of
       this special issue as the starting point for the current discussion, I would like to make
       two remarks. Judging by sales, the book, although it was my first, has remained my
       most successful to date. The second remark concerns the reason, I suspect, for this unu-
       sual reception: the book contains a social and conceptual history of the ‘public
       sphere’ that has attracted a great deal of criticism but has also provided new stimuli to
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Ciaran Cronin. Email: ciarancronin@textwright.de
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      146                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      more wide-ranging historical research. This historical aspect is not our topic. But for the
      social sciences, it had the effect of embedding the political concept of the ‘public sphere’
      in a wider socio-structural context. Until then, the term had been used in a rather unspe-
      cific sense, primarily within the conceptual field of ‘public opinion’ that, since
      Lazarsfeld, had been conceived in demoscopic terms; but my study assigned the socio-
      logical concept of the public sphere a place in the functionally differentiated structure
      of modern societies between civil society and the political system. As a result, it could
      be studied with a view to its functional contribution to social integration and, in particu-
      lar, to the political integration of the citizens.1 Although I am well aware that the social
      significance of the public sphere goes far beyond its contribution to democratic will
      formation in constitutional states,2 I also discussed it subsequently from the perspective
      of political theory.3 In the present contribution, too, I take as my starting point the func-
      tion of the public sphere in ensuring the sustainability of the democratic political com-
      munity. Martin Seeliger’s and Sebastian Sevignani’s interesting reflections have
      persuaded me to reflect on the further structural transformation of the public sphere,
      although I have been dealing with other topics for a long time and have only been able
      to take very selective note of the relevant publications. However, I have had an oppor-
      tunity to read most of the interesting contributions in this collection and am grateful to
      my colleagues for this instructive reading.            
        I will begin by addressing the relationship between normative and empirical theory
      (I); then I will go on to explain why and how we should understand the democratic pro-
      cess, once it is institutionalised under social conditions marked by individualism and
      pluralism, in the light of deliberative politics (II); I will conclude these preliminary theo-
      retical reflections by recalling the improbable conditions that must be fulfilled if a crisis-
      prone capitalist democracy is to remain stable (III). Within this theoretical framework,
      for which Structural Transformation (1962; English translation 1989) provided a pre-
      liminary social-historical analysis, I will outline how digitalisation is transforming the
      structure of the media and the repercussions of this transformation for the political pro-
      cess. The technological advance of digitalised communication initially fosters trends
      towards the dissolution of boundaries, but also towards the fragmentation of the public
      sphere. The platform character of the new media creates a space of communication
      alongside the editorial public sphere in which readers, listeners and viewers can sponta-
      neously assume the role of authors (IV). The reach of the new media is shown by the
      findings of a longitudinal survey on the usage of the expanded media offerings. Whereas
      both television and radio have been more or less able to hold their ground in the course
      of the rapid increase in internet usage over the past two decades, consumption of printed
      newspapers and magazines has plummeted (V). The rise of the new media is taking place
      in the shadow of a commercial exploitation of the currently almost unregulated internet
      communication. On the one hand, this is threatening to undermine the economic basis of
      the traditional newspaper publishers and of journalists as the affected occupational
      group; on the other hand, a mode of semi-public, fragmented and self-enclosed commu-
      nication seems to be spreading among exclusive users of social media that is distorting
      their perception of the political public sphere as such. If this conjecture is correct, an
      important subjective prerequisite for the formation of public opinion and political will
      in a more or less deliberative way is jeopardised among an increasing portion of the
      citizenry (VI).                                        

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      147     
                                                             
       I                                                     
       In studies that deal with the role of the political public sphere in constitutional democra-
       cies, we generally make a distinction between empirical investigations and normative
       theories. John Rawls, for example, speaks in this connection of ‘ideal theory’. I think that
       this alternative is oversimplified. In my view, the role of democratic theory is to recon-
       struct the rational content of the norms and practices that have acquired positive validity
       since the constitutional revolutions of the late 18th century and, as such, have become
       part of historical reality. The very fact that empirical studies of the formation of opinions
       under democratic conditions become pointless if they are not also interpreted in the light
       of the normative requirements they are supposed to satisfy in constitutional democracies
       highlights an interesting circumstance. However, understanding this calls for a brief his-
       torical digression. For the revolutionary acts that endowed fundamental rights with posi-
       tive validity first made citizens aware of a new normative gradient [normatives Gefälle],
       which thereby became part of social reality itself.   
        The historical novelty of this normativity of constitutional orders based on fundamen-
       tal rights, whose ‘unsaturated’ character pointing beyond the status quo makes it pecu-
       liarly demanding, can be better understood against the backdrop of the usual form of
       social normativity. Social phenomena, be they actions, streams of communication or
       artefacts, values or norms, habits or institutions, contracts or organisations, have a rule-
       governed character. This is shown by the possibility of deviant behaviour: rules can be
       followed or broken. There are different kinds of rules: logical, mathematical and gram-
       matical rules, game rules and rules of action, where the latter comprise instrumental and
       social rules of action, which can be differentiated in turn according to strategic and nor-
       matively regulated interactions. It is the latter norms, in particular, that are distinguished
       by the peculiar mode of validity of the ‘ought’.4 As the nature of the sanctions for deviant
       behaviour shows, such normative behavioural expectations may make more or less strict
       demands, with morality imposing the most stringent demands. The universalistic moral
       conceptions that arose with the Axial Age world views are distinguished by the fact that
       they call for the equal treatment of all persons in principle. In the course of the European
       Enlightenment, this moral-cognitive potential became detached from the respective reli-
       gious or metaphysical background and was differentiated in such a way that – according
       to the still authoritative Kantian conception – each individual in his or her inalienable
       individuality ought to be accorded equal respect and receive equal treatment. On this
       conception, each person’s conduct must be judged in the light of his or her individual
       situation in accordance with precisely those general norms that are equally good for
       everyone from the discursively examined point of view of all those possibly affected.
        A particular sociological implication of this development is especially interesting in
       the present context. We must recall the unprecedented radicalness of rational morality in
       order to gauge the demanding character of the oughtness claim raised by this egalitarian-
       individualistic universalism and, switching perspective from rational morality to the
       rational law inspired by this morality, to understand the historical import of how, since
       the first two constitutional revolutions, this steep moral-cognitive potential has formed
       the core of the basic rights sanctioned by the state, and thus of positive law in general.
       With the ‘declaration’ of the basic rights and human rights, the substance of rational
       morality migrated into the medium of binding constitutional law constructed out of

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      148                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      subjective rights! With those historically unprecedented founding acts that give rise to
      democratic constitutional orders in the late 18th century, the hitherto unknown tension of
      a normative gradient lodged itself in the political consciousness of legally free and equal
      citizens. This encouragement to develop a new normative self-understanding went hand
      in hand with a new historical consciousness turned offensively towards the future (inves-
      tigated by Reinhard Koselleck). Taken as a whole, this amounted to a complex shift in
      consciousness that is embedded in the capitalist dynamics of a transformation of social
      conditions accelerated by technological progress. In the meantime, however, this
      dynamic has aroused in Western societies a more defensive mindset that instead feels
      overwhelmed by the growth in social complexity propelled by technology and the econ-
      omy. But the persisting social movements that continually reawaken the consciousness
      of the incomplete inclusion of the oppressed, marginalised and degraded, of afflicted,
      exploited and disadvantaged groups, classes, subcultures, genders, races, nations and
      continents, remind us of the steep gradient between the positive validity and the still
      unsaturated content of the human rights which have, in the meantime, been ‘declared’
      not only at the national level.5 Hence, and this is the point of my digression, among the
      preconditions of the survival of a democratic polity is that the citizens should regard
      themselves from the participant perspective as involved in the process of progressive
      realisation of the basic rights that, although unexhausted, already enjoy positive
      validity.                                              
        Quite apart from these long-term processes through which the basic rights are real-
      ised, what interests me is the normal case in which the status of free and equal citizens
      in a democratically constituted polity is associated with certain taken-for-granted ideali-
      sations. For when the citizens participate in their civic practices, they cannot avoid mak-
      ing the intuitive (and counterfactual) assumption that the civil rights they practise
      generally deliver on what they promise. Especially with a view to the stability of the
      political system, the normative core of the democratic constitution must be anchored in
      civic consciousness, that is, in the citizens’ own implicit beliefs. It is not the philoso-
      phers, but the large majority of the citizens who must be intuitively convinced of the
      constitutional principles. On the other hand, citizens must also be able to trust that their
      votes count equally in democratic elections, that legislation and jurisdiction, the actions
      of government and the administration, are mostly above board, and that, as a general
      rule, there is a fair opportunity to revise dubious decisions. Even though these expecta-
      tions are idealisations that the actual practice sometimes falls short of to a greater or
      lesser extent, they create social facts insofar as they are reflected in the citizens’ judge-
      ments and conduct. What is problematic about such practices is not the idealising
      assumptions they demand of their participants, but the credibility of the institutions,
      which must not openly and enduringly repudiate these idealisations.
        Trump’s fatal exhortation would hardly have met with the intended furious response
      of the citizens who stormed the Capitol on 6 January 2021 if the political elites had not
      for decades disappointed the legitimate, constitutionally guaranteed expectations of a
      significant portion of their citizens. Hence, a political theory tailored to this kind of con-
      stitutional state must be designed in such a way that it does justice both to the peculiar
      idealising surplus of a morally based system of basic rights which assures the citizens
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      149     
                                                             
       that they are involved in the exercise of democratically legitimised government, as well
       as to the social and institutional conditions which lend credibility to the idealisations that
       the citizens necessarily associate with their practices.
        A theory of democracy, therefore, does not need to undertake the task of designing,
       i.e. constructing and justifying, the principles of a just political order on its own in order
       to instil them in the citizens like a teacher; in other words, it does not have to understand
       itself as a normatively designed theory. Its task is instead to rationally reconstruct such
       principles from existing law and from the corresponding intuitive expectations and con-
       ceptions of legitimacy of the citizens. It must render the fundamental meaning of the
       historically established and proven, and hence sufficiently stable, constitutional orders
       explicit and explain the justifying reasons that can invest the de facto exercise of govern-
       ment with actual legitimising power in the eyes of their citizens and therefore also ensure
       civic participation (see Gaus, 2013). That political theory, by making explicit the implicit
       consciousness of the mass of the citizens who participate in political life, can in turn
       shape their normative self-understanding is no more unusual than the role of academic
       contemporary historiography, which performatively influences the further course of the
       historical events it describes. This does not mean that political theory plays an inherently
       pedagogical role vis-à-vis politics. Therefore, I do not see deliberative politics as a far-
       fetched ideal against which sordid reality must be measured, but as an existential precon-
       dition in pluralistic societies of any democracy worthy of the name (see Habermas,
       2018). The more heterogeneous the conditions of life, the cultural forms of life and
       individual lifestyles are in a given society, the more the lack of an a fortiori existing
       background consensus must be counterbalanced by the commonality of the public for-
       mation of opinion and political will.                 
        Because the origins of the classical theories predate the constitutional revolutions of
       the late 18th century, they could present themselves as normative blueprints for estab-
       lishing democratic constitutions. However, a contemporary political theory can simply
       note that the exacting democratic constitutional idea introduces a tension between the
       positive validity of binding constitutional norms and the constitutional reality into the
       very reality of modern societies and, when extreme dissonances become apparent, this
       tension can still trigger the mobilising dynamic of mass protests. Hence, such a theory
       must recognise that its task is reconstructive in nature. The republican and liberal theo-
       retical traditions, however, already distort this idea by one-sidedly according priority
       either to popular sovereignty or to the rule of law, and thereby miss the point that the
       subjective freedoms exercised by individuals and intersubjectively exercised popular
       sovereignty are equally original. For the idea that underlies those two constitutional
       revolutions is the foundation of a self-determined association of free consociates under
       law, whereby the latter, as democratic co-legislators, must ultimately grant themselves
       their freedom through the equal distribution of subjective rights in accordance with
       general laws. According to this idea of collective self-determination, which combines
       the egalitarian universalism of equal rights for all with the individualism of every sub-
       ject, democracy and the rule of law are on a par. And only a discourse theory that
       revolves around the idea of deliberative politics can do justice to this idea (see Habermas,
       1995, 2009).                                          
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      150                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      II                                                     
      The approach of deliberative politics can be traced back to the early liberal world of
      ideas of the Vormärz period but, in the meantime, it has unfolded in the context of the
      welfare state. Its chief merit is that it explains how, in pluralistic societies that lack a
      shared religion or world view, political compromises can be reached against the back-
      ground of an intuitive constitutional consensus. The secularisation of state power gave
      rise to a gap in legitimation. Because the belief that the ruling dynasties were divinely
      ordained no longer sufficed to legitimise them in modern societies, the democratic sys-
      tem had to legitimise itself out of its own resources, as it were, through the legitimacy-
      generating power of the legally institutionalised procedure of democratic will formation.
      Religious conceptions of legitimacy were not replaced by a different idea, but instead by
      the procedure of democratic self-empowerment, which is institutionalised in the form of
      equally distributed subjective rights, so that it can be exercised by free and equal citizens.
      At first glance, it seems quite mysterious how the legal institutionalisation of a procedure
      of democratic will formation – in other words, sheer ‘legality’ – could nevertheless give
      rise to the ‘legitimacy’ of universally convincing results. Essential to explaining this is
      the analysis of the meaning that this procedure acquires from the perspective of the par-
      ticipants. It owes its persuasiveness to an improbable combination of two conditions: on
      the one hand, the procedure calls for the inclusion of all those affected by possible deci-
      sions as equal participants in the political decision-making process; on the other hand, it
      makes democratic decisions in which all individuals together are involved, dependent on
      the more or less pronounced discursive character of the preceding deliberations. As a
      result, the inclusive formation of will becomes contingent on the force of the reasons
      mobilised during the preceding process of opinion formation. Inclusion corresponds to
      the democratic requirement that all those affected should have equal rights to participate
      in political will formation, while the filter of deliberation takes into account the expecta-
      tion that solutions to problems should be cognitively correct and viable, and grounds the
      assumption that the results are rationally acceptable. This assumption can be justified, in
      turn, by the falsifiable supposition that, in the consultations preceding a majority deci-
      sion, all relevant topics, requisite information and suitable proposals for solutions are
      discussed as far as possible with arguments pro and con. And it is this requirement of free
      deliberation that explains the central role of the political public sphere.6 Incidentally, this
      abstract consideration is confirmed by the historical fact that something like a ‘bourgeois
      public sphere’ emerged at the same time as liberal democracy, first in England and then
      in the United States, France and other European countries.
        However, those two requirements of the democratic process – namely, deliberation
      and the inclusion of all citizens – can only be realised, even approximately, at the level
      of the institutions of the state, and especially in the representative bodies of parliamen-
      tary law-making. This explains the essential but limited contribution that political com-
      munication in the public sphere can make to the democratic process. Its contribution is
      essential because it represents the sole locus where public opinion and political will are
      formed in a manner that in principle includes in corpore all adult citizens who are eligi-
      ble to vote. And this can, in turn, motivate the decisions that citizens make collectively,
      but as individuals and in the isolation of the voting booth – that is, ‘of their own free
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      151     
                                                             
       will’. These electoral decisions lead to an outcome that is binding on all citizens insofar
       as they determine the political composition of parliament and, directly or indirectly, of
       the government. On the other hand, the contribution of the public sphere to the formation
       of public opinion and political will in a democracy is limited because, as a general rule,
       no collectively binding individual decisions are taken there (only in rare cases do funda-
       mental issues have such a clear structure that they can be decided by such plebiscites).
       The formation of opinion steered by the mass media gives rise to a plurality of public
       opinions among the dispersed audience of citizens. These public opinions, which are
       compiled out of topics, contributions and information and thus assume a distinctive pro-
       file, compete over the relevant issues, the correct policy goals and the best problem-
       solving strategies. One circumstance is especially relevant in our context: the overall
       influence that the will of the citizens, hence of the sovereign, acquires over the decisions
       of the political system depends essentially on the enlightening quality of the contribution
       of the mass media to this formation of opinion. This is because opinion formation is
       sustained by the prior processing of the topics and contributions, alternative proposals,
       information and supporting and opposing positions by journalists. The function of the
       professional media is to rationally process the input that is fed into the public sphere via
       the information channels of the political parties, of the interest groups and PR agencies,
       and of the societal subsystems, among others, as well as by the organisations and intel-
       lectuals of civil society. This more or less informed pluralism of opinion filtered by the
       media system gives every citizen the opportunity to form his or her own opinion and to
       make an election decision that, from his or her point of view, is rationally motivated.
       However, the result of the competition over opinions and decisions remains open within
       the public sphere itself; here deliberation is still separate from the decisions of the indi-
       vidual voters, because the electoral votes are only prepared in the public. It is only
       beyond the threshold of general elections that the elected members of parliament can
       consult and decide with each other in accordance with democratic procedures. Only in
       the representative bodies and the other state institutions, and in an especially formal way
       in the courts, are procedural rules tailored to the deliberative format of opinion and will
       formation that justifies the presumption that majority decisions are more or less ration-
       ally acceptable.                                      
        In order to correctly assess the limited contribution that the political public can make,
       we must examine the organisational section of the constitutional text and the structural
       division of labour within the political system as a whole – and read it like a flow chart.
       It then becomes apparent how the democratic flow of the citizens’ public opinion and
       will formation branches out beyond elections and is directed into the channels – besieged
       by the lobbying of the functional systems – of party politics, legislation, jurisdiction,
       administration and government. It ultimately flows into the decisions that stem – within
       the framework of the law – from compromises between functional imperatives, political
       and social interests and voter preferences. The legitimate political results are in turn
       evaluated and criticised in the political public sphere and are processed into new voter
       preferences after the conclusion of legislative terms.
        The assumption that political discourse is also oriented to the goal of reaching an
       agreement is often misunderstood. It by no means implies the idealistic conception of the
       democratic process as something like a convivial university seminar. On the contrary,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      152                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      one can assume that the orientation of reasonable participants to the truth or correctness
      of their argued convictions adds even more fuel to the fire of political disputes and lends
      them a fundamentally agonal character. To argue is to contradict. Only in virtue of the
      right, and even the encouragement, to say ‘no’ to each other can the epistemic potential
      of conflicting opinions unfold in discourse; for the latter is geared to the self-correction
      of participants who, without mutual criticism, could not learn from each other. The point
      of deliberative politics is, after all, that it enables us to improve our beliefs through politi-
      cal disputes and get closer to correct solutions to problems. In the cacophony of conflict-
      ing opinions unleashed in the public sphere only one thing is presupposed – the consensus
      on the shared constitutional principles that legitimises all other disputes. Against this
      consensual backdrop, the whole democratic process consists of a tide of dissent that is
      stirred up over and over again by the citizens’ search for rationally acceptable decisions
      oriented to the truth.                                 
        The deliberative character of the formation of public opinion and political will by the
      voters is measured in the public sphere by the discursive quality of the contributions, not
      by the goal of a consensus, which is in any case unattainable; rather, here the participants’
      orientation to the truth is supposed to ignite an open-ended conflict of opinions that gives
      rise to competing public opinions. This dynamic of enduring dissent in the public sphere
      likewise shapes the competition between parties and the antagonism between government
      and opposition, as well as differences of opinion among experts. The arguments mobilised
      in this way can then inform the binding procedural decisions to be taken in time by the
      appropriate organs of the political system. All that is required to institutionalise the anar-
      chic power of saying ‘no’ unleashed in public debates and election campaigns, in disputes
      between political parties, in the negotiations of parliament and its committees and in the
      deliberations of the government and the courts, is the prior political integration of all
      participants in the consensus over the basic intention of their constitution. The latter is
      simple enough: it merely spells out the plain will of the citizens to obey only the laws they
      have given themselves. Without such a consensus on the meaning of deliberative demo-
      cratic self-legislation, the respective minorities would not have any reason to submit to
      majoritarian decisions, for the time being at least. In making this point, however, we must
      not lose sight of the main factor on which the fate of a democracy depends: judged from
      this normative standpoint, the institutionalised formation of political will must also actu-
      ally function on the whole in such a way that the voters’ constitutional consensus is con-
      firmed from time to time by experience. In other words, there must be a recognisable
      connection between the results of government action and the input of the voters’ decisions
      such that the citizens can recognise it as the confirmation of the rationalising power of
      their own democratic opinion and will formation.7 The citizens must be able to perceive
      their conflict of opinions as both consequential and as a dispute over the better reasons.8
        ‘But this is at odds with reality,’ one might object, even now in the oldest Anglo-
      Saxon democracies. The approval that the storming of the Capitol found among Trump
      voters must probably also be understood as the emotive response of voters who for dec-
      ades have lacked a sense that their ignored interests are taken seriously by the political
      system in concrete, discernible ways. The dynamic of political regression into which
      almost all Western democracies have been drawn since the turn of the millennium can be
      measured by the decline, and in some countries almost the demise, of this rationalising

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      153     
                                                             
       power of public debates. On the other hand, this dependence of the problem-solving
       power of a democracy on the flow of deliberative politics highlights the central role of
       the political public sphere.                          
        Without a suitable context, however, the essential preconditions of deliberative poli-
       tics for the democratic legitimisation of government cannot gain traction among a popu-
       lation from which, after all, ‘all authority’ is supposed to be ‘derived’.9 Government
       action, landmark decisions of the higher courts, parliamentary legislation, competition
       between political parties and free political elections call for an active citizenry, because
       the political public sphere is rooted in a civil society which – as the sounding board for
       the disruptions of major functional systems in need of repair – establishes the communi-
       cative connections between politics and its social ‘environments’. Moreover, civil soci-
       ety can only play the role of a kind of early warning system for policymakers if it brings
       forth the actors who organise public attention for the relevant issues that are preoccupy-
       ing citizens. In the large territorial societies of the modern Western democracies, how-
       ever, there has always been a tension between the functionally required level of civic
       commitment and the private commitments and interests that citizens both want to and
       need to fulfil. This structural conflict between the public and private roles of citizens is
       also reflected in the public sphere itself. In Europe, the bourgeois public sphere in its
       literary and its political form was only gradually able to free itself from the shadow of
       older formations – above all the religious public sphere of ecclesiastical government and
       the representative public sphere of the personal rule of emperors, kings and princes –
       once the socio-structural prerequisites for a functional separation of state and society, of
       the public and private economic spheres, had been satisfied. Viewed from the lifeworld
       perspective of those involved, therefore, the civil society of politically active citizens is
       inherently situated in this field of tension between the private and public spheres. As we
       shall see, the digitalisation of public communication is blurring the perception of this
       boundary between the private and public spheres of life, although the social-structural
       prerequisites for this distinction, which also has far-reaching implications for the legal
       system, have not changed. From the perspective of the semi-private, semi-public com-
       munication spaces in which users of social media are active today, the inclusive character
       of the public sphere, which was hitherto clearly separate from the private sphere, is dis-
       appearing. This represents, as I would now like to show, the disturbing phenomenon on
       the subjective side of the users of the media that at the same time draws attention to the
       inadequacy of the political regulation of those new media.
       III                                                   
       Before addressing specific changes in the structure of the media and hypotheses concern-
       ing their implications for the political function of the public sphere, I would like to inter-
       polate some remarks on the economic, social and cultural boundary conditions that must
       be fulfilled to a sufficient extent as a precondition for deliberative politics. For it is only
       against the backdrop of the complex causes of the crisis tendencies of capitalist democra-
       cies in general that we can assess the limited contribution that the digitalisation of public
       communication may add to the other relevant causes of an impairment of deliberative
       opinion and will formation.                           
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      154                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
        Active citizenship requires, firstly, a largely liberal political culture consisting of a
      delicate fabric of attitudes and taken-for-granted cultural assumptions. This is because
      the population’s basic understanding of the democratic constitutional principles, which
      remains for the most part implicit, is embedded in an extensive network of historical
      memories and traditional beliefs, practices and value orientations; these are preserved
      from generation to generation only thanks to customary patterns of political socialisation
      and institutionalised patterns of political education. The time span of half a century
      required, for example, for the political resocialisation of the population of the (old)
      Federal Republic of Germany after the end of the Nazi era – despite the preceding 150
      years of constitutional development – is an indicator of the obstacles that generally have
      to be overcome by any acclimatisation to a liberal political culture. For the moral core of
      such a culture consists in the willingness of citizens to reciprocally recognise others as
      fellow citizens and democratic co-legislators endowed with equal rights (see Forst,
      2013). This begins with regarding political adversaries in a spirit open to compromise as
      opponents and no longer as enemies – and it continues, beyond the limits of different
      ethnic, linguistic and religious ways of life, with reciprocal inclusion in a shared political
      culture of strangers who want to remain strangers to one another. Under conditions of
      cultural pluralism, this political culture must have differentiated itself from the relevant
      majority culture to such an extent that every citizen can recognise himself or herself as a
      member. The social bond of a society, however heterogeneous, will remain intact only if
      political integration generally ensures a form of civic solidarity that, far from demand-
      ing unconditional altruism, calls for a limited reciprocal readiness to help. This kind of
      solidarity goes beyond the willingness to make compromises based on one’s interests.
      Nevertheless, among fellow members of the same political community, it is only
      bound up with the expectation of reciprocity at some indeterminate time in the future
      – specifically with the expectation that others will feel obliged to provide similar assis-
      tance in a similar situation.10 A ‘liberal’ political culture is not a breeding ground for
      ‘libertarian’ attitudes; it calls for an orientation to the common good, albeit one that
      makes modest demands on its addressees. If an outvoted minority is to be able to accept
      majority decisions, then not all citizens may base their electoral decisions exclusively on
      their short-term self-interest. A sufficient – and, moreover, representative – proportion of
      citizens must also be willing to engage in the role of democratic co-legislators who adopt
      an orientation to the common good.                     
        A second condition that is necessary for an active civil society is a level of social
      equality that allows the electorate to participate spontaneously and to a sufficient extent
      in the democratic process through which public opinions and political will are formed,
      although such participation must not be made compulsory. The architecture of the con-
      stitutional state’s system of fundamental rights – which guarantees, on the one hand, the
      freedoms of private citizens through subjective private rights (and welfare state entitle-
      ments) and, on the other, the political autonomy of citizens through rights of public
      communication and participation – only becomes fully accessible in the light of the
      functional meaning of the complementary roles that the private and public autonomy
      of citizens also play for each other, aside from their respective intrinsic value. The
      political rights empower, on the one hand, citizens to participate in democratic legisla-
      tion, which decides, among other things, on the distribution of private rights and

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      155     
                                                             
       entitlements, and thus on the citizens’ opportunities to acquire an appropriate social
       status; on the other hand, this social status in turn creates the prerequisites and motiva-
       tions for the use that public citizens actually make of their civic rights in each case. The
       close correlation between social status and voter turnout has been widely documented.
       But this expectation that democratic participation and securing social status should
       facilitate each other will function only as long as democratic elections actually rectify
       substantial and structurally entrenched social inequalities. Empirical studies confirm
       the vicious circle that takes root when, due to resignation over the lack of perceptible
       improvements in living conditions, abstentionism becomes entrenched among the lower
       status segments of the population. Then the parties that were once ‘responsible’ for the
       interests of these disadvantaged strata tend to neglect a clientele from which they cannot
       currently expect to receive votes; and this tendency in turn strengthens the motivation
       for abstentionism (see Schäfer, 2015). Today, we are not observing a reversal, but rather
       an ironic inversion of this vicious circle insofar as populist movements are successfully
       mobilising the potential of non-voters (Schäfer and Zürn, 2021). Then, of course, these
       radicalised groups of non-voters no longer participate in elections under the accepted
       presuppositions of a democratic election, but instead in the spirit of obstructionist
       ‘opposition to the system’.11 Even if this populism of the ‘disconnected’ cannot be
       explained solely by increasing social inequality, because other strata that are struggling
       to adapt to accelerated technological and social change also feel ‘disconnected’, it is at
       any rate a manifestation of a critical disintegration of society and a lack of successful
       policies to counteract it.12                          
        This draws attention, finally, to the precarious relationship between the democratic
       state and a capitalist economy that tends to reinforce social inequalities. The balancing
       of the conflicting functional imperatives by the welfare state is (at this level of abstrac-
       tion) the third precondition for the success of a democratic regime worthy of the name.
       Political Economy first revealed the systematic connection between the political system
       and society; this was the perspective from which I traced the structural transformation of
       the public sphere in the earlier work.13 However, a liberal political culture is more a
       boundary condition for the state, one which happens to be satisfied to a greater or lesser
       extent, rather than something that depends in turn on administrative intervention. The
       situation is different with the social stratification of society and the existing degree of
       social inequality. In any case, self-perpetuating capitalist modernisation generates a need
       for state regulation to curb the centrifugal forces of social disintegration. The govern-
       ments of those national welfare states that emerged in the West during the second half of
       the 20th century find themselves compelled to undertake such political countermeasures
       while the conditions for political legitimation are becoming increasingly demanding. To
       avoid crises of social integration, governments, as Claus Offe has shown, are trying to
       satisfy two conflicting demands: on the one hand, they must ensure sufficient conditions
       for the valorisation of capital in order to generate tax revenues; on the other hand, from
       the point of view of political and social justice, governments must satisfy the interest of
       the population as a whole in securing the legal and material preconditions of the private
       and public autonomy of every citizen – otherwise they will be stripped of their democratic
       legitimacy. However, capitalist democracies will only be able to tread a path of crisis
       avoidance between these two imperatives if they possess sufficient governance capacity.

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      156                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      In other words, the scope of the interventionist policies must match the extent of the
      economic cycles relevant for securing national prosperity. Evidently, the Western democ-
      racies satisfied this condition sufficiently only for a limited period – namely, only until
      the worldwide deregulation of markets and the globalisation of financial markets that
      have constrained the fiscal policies of the states.    
        A historical account of national public spheres based on these roughly outlined sys-
      tematic viewpoints would reveal how difficult it is to arrive at any tenable generalisa-
      tions at all about the framework conditions for the functioning of national public spheres
      in different historical periods. National peculiarities overlay the general trends towards
      the kind of nationally organised capitalism that shaped the post-war development of
      democracy in the West until the neoliberal turn. While during this period the develop-
      ment of the welfare state strengthened popular support for democracy, privatist trends
      towards depoliticisation already emerged in the course of the development of a con-
      sumer society (about whose beginnings I was probably too sceptical at the time of writ-
      ing Structural Transformation – in what was felt to be the authoritarian climate of the
      Adenauer period). Since the shift towards neoliberal policies, however, the Western
      democracies have entered a phase of increasing internal destabilisation, which is being
      aggravated by the challenges of the climate crisis and the growing pressure of immigra-
      tion. A further aggravating factor is the perceived rise of China and of other ‘emerging
      countries’ and the resulting transformation of the global economic and political land-
      scape. Domestically, social inequality has increased as the scope for action of nation-
      states has been constrained by imperatives of globally deregulated markets. In the
      affected subcultures, the fear of social decline has grown in tandem with anxiety over
      the inability of the nation-state to cope with the complexity of the accelerated social
      changes.                                               
        Even apart from the new global political situation created by the pandemic, these
      circumstances suggest that the nation-states united in the European Union must strive for
      greater integration – in other words, that they should try to recover the competences they
      have lost at the national level as a result of this development by creating new political
      capacities for action at the transnational level (see Habermas, 2012). However, a sober
      description of institutional approaches to global governance, which have consolidated
      rather than dismantled international asymmetries of power, does not inspire hope (see
      Zürn, 2021). In particular, the indecisiveness of the EU in the face of its current problems
      raises the question of how nation-states can unite at the transnational level to form a
      democratic regime which, without itself taking on the character of an actual state, would
      nevertheless acquire the power to act globally. This would also presuppose a more pro-
      nounced opening of the national public spheres to each other. But both the divisions
      within the EU and the halting but ultimately accomplished Brexit suggest instead that
      existing democratic regimes are being hollowed out – and that the foreign policy of the
      great powers might even revert to a new kind of imperialism. For the time being, we do
      not know how the national and global economic problems facing a world society stricken
      by a pandemic will be perceived and processed by the political elites in our countries
      who still have some power to act. At the moment, there are few pointers for the desirable
      policy shift to a social and ecological agenda leading to greater integration of core Europe
      at least.                                              

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      157     
                                                             
       IV                                                    
       The media system is crucially important if the political public sphere is to fulfil its role
       in generating competing public opinions that satisfy the standards of deliberative poli-
       tics. For the deliberative quality of these opinions depends on whether the process from
       which they emerge satisfies certain functional requirements on both the input side and
       the throughput and output sides. Public opinions are only relevant if those from the ranks
       of politics, as well as the lobbyists and PR agencies of the functional subsystems and,
       finally, the various actors from civil society, are sufficiently responsive to discover the
       problems in need of regulation and to ensure the correct input. And public opinions are
       only effective if the corresponding topics and contributions of those who produce the
       opinions find their way into the public eye and, on the output side, attract the attention of
       the wider – voting – population. Our primary interest here is in the media system respon-
       sible for the throughput. Although for civil society actors, face-to-face encounters in
       everyday life and in public events represent the two local regions of the public sphere in
       which their own initiatives originate, the public communication steered by mass media is
       the only domain in which the noise of voices can condense into relevant and effective
       public opinions. Our topic is how digitalisation has changed the media system that steers
       this mass communication. The technically and organisationally highly complex media
       system requires a professionalised staff that plays the gatekeeper role (as it has come to
       be called) for the communicative currents from which the citizens distil public opinions.
       This staff comprises journalists who work for the news services, the media and the pub-
       lishing houses – in other words, specialists who perform authorial, editorial, proofread-
       ing and managerial functions in the media and publishing business. This staff directs the
       throughput and, together with the companies that manage production and organise distri-
       bution, forms the infrastructure of the public sphere that ultimately determines the two
       decisive parameters of public communication – the scope and the deliberative quality of
       the offerings. How inclusive the reception of the published opinions actually is – how
       intensively and with what investment of time they are received on the output side by
       readers and listeners and are processed further into effective public opinions in the two
       aforementioned local areas of the political public sphere and, finally, are paid out to the
       political system in the currency of election results – ultimately depends on media users,
       specifically on their attention and interest, their time budgets, educational background
       and so on.                                            
        The influence of digital media on a further structural transformation of the political
       public sphere can be seen, for example since the turn of the millennium, from the extent
       and nature of media use. Whether this change in scope also affects the deliberative qual-
       ity of public debate is an open question. As the relevant research in the fields of com-
       munication science, political science and the sociology of elections demonstrates
       – especially studies on voter turnout and public ignorance – the values for these two
       dimensions of public communication by democratic standards were already anything but
       satisfactory prior to digitalisation; however, they pointed to democratic conditions that
       fell short of stability-endangering crises. Today, the signs of political regression are there
       for everyone to see. Whether and to what extent the condition of the public sphere is also
       contributing to this development would have to be shown by examining the inclusiveness
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      158                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      of the formation of public opinions and the rationality of the prominent opinions in the
      public sphere. Evidently, empirical studies of the latter variable face major obstacles.
      While data are available for media use, a theoretical quantity such as ‘deliberative qual-
      ity’ is already difficult to operationalise for the procedurally regulated opinion formation
      in individual bodies such as committees, parliaments and courts (Steiner et al., 2004), but
      is even more difficult to operationalise for the unregulated communication processes in
      extensive national public spheres. However, the data from a long-term comparative study
      of media use provide a basis to infer from an independent assessment of the quality of the
      media offerings that are being consumed to the level of reflectiveness of public opinions.
      Before pursuing this question further, however, we need to get clear about the revolution-
      ary character of the new media. For this is not just a matter of an expansion of the range
      of media previously available, but of a caesura in the development of the media in human
      history comparable to the introduction of printing.    
        After the first evolutionary advance to recording the spoken word in writing, the
      introduction of the mechanical printing press in early modernity meant that the alpha-
      betic characters became detached from handwritten parchment; in recent decades, as a
      result of electronic digitalisation, binary-coded characters have become detached in a
      similar way from printed paper. As this further, equally momentous innovation has
      unfolded, the communication flows of our garrulous species have spread, accelerated
      and become networked with unprecedented speed across the entire globe and, retrospec-
      tively, across all epochs of world history. With this global dissolution of boundaries in
      space and time, these flows have simultaneously become condensed, differentiated and
      multiplied according to functions and contents, and have been generalised across cul-
      tural and class-specific divisions. The innovative idea that ushered in this third revolu-
      tion in communications technologies was the worldwide networking of computers, as a
      result of which anyone could communicate from any place with anyone anywhere else in
      the world. Initially the new technology was used by scientists. In 1991, the American
      National Science Foundation decided to make this invention available for private use,
      which meant that it was also available for commercial purposes. This was the decisive
      step towards the establishment of the World Wide Web (WWW) two years later, which
      created the technical basis for the logical completion of a development in communica-
      tions technology that, over the course of human history, gradually overcame the original
      limitation of linguistic communication to face-to-face oral conversations and exchanges
      within hearing range. For many areas of life and activity, this innovation opens up
      undoubted advances. But for the democratic public sphere, the centrifugal expansion of
      simultaneously accelerated communication to an arbitrary number of participants across
      arbitrary distances generates an ambivalent explosive force; for, with its orientation
      towards the centre constituted by organisations that have the political power to act, the
      public sphere is for the time being limited to national territories.14 There can be no doubt
      that the expansion and acceleration of opportunities for communication and the increase
      in the range of the publicly thematised events has benefits for political citizens as well.
      The world has also shrunk on the television screens in our living rooms. The content of
      press, radio and television programmes does not change when they are received on
      smartphones. And when films are produced for streaming services like Netflix, this may
      lead to interesting aesthetic changes; but the changes in reception and the regrettable

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      159     
                                                             
       hollowing out of the cinema have long been heralded by the competition of television.
       On the other hand, aside from its evident benefits, the new technology also has highly
       ambivalent and potentially disruptive repercussions for the political public sphere in the
       national context. This is a result of how consumers of the new media make use of the
       availability of limitless possibilities for networking, that is, of ‘platforms’ for possible
       communications with arbitrary addressees.             
        For the media structure of the public sphere, this platform character represents what
       is actually novel about the new media. For, on the one hand, the platforms dispense with
       the productive role of journalistic mediation and programme design performed by the old
       media; in this respect, the new media are not ‘media’ in the established sense. They radi-
       cally alter the previously predominant pattern of communication in the public sphere by
       empowering all potential users in principle to become independent and equally entitled
       authors. The ‘new’ media differ from the traditional media in that digital companies
       make use of this technology to offer potential users the unlimited opportunities for digital
       networking like blank slates for their own communicative content. Unlike traditional
       news services and publishers, such as print media, radio and television, these companies
       are not responsible for their own ‘programmes’, that is, for communicative contents that
       are professionally produced and passed through editorial filters. They neither produce,
       nor edit nor select; but by acting in the global network as intermediaries ‘without respon-
       sibility’ who establish new connections and, with the contingent multiplication and
       acceleration of unexpected contacts, initiate and intensify discourses with unpredictable
       contents, they profoundly alter the character of public communication itself.
        Broadcasts establish a linear and one-way connection between a broadcaster and
       many potential recipients; the two sides encounter each other in different roles, namely
       as publicly identifiable or known producers, editors and authors responsible for their
       publications, on the one side, and an anonymous audience of readers, listeners or view-
       ers, on the other. In contrast, platforms provide a multifaceted communicative connec-
       tion open to networking that facilitates the spontaneous exchange of possible contents
       between potentially many users. The latter are not differentiated as regards their roles by
       the medium alone; rather, they encounter each other as participants in communicative
       exchanges on spontaneously chosen topics who are in principle equal and self-responsi-
       ble. Unlike the asymmetrical relationship between broadcasters and recipients, the
       decentralised connection between these media users is reciprocal in principle, but its
       content is unregulated because professional filters are lacking. The egalitarian and
       unregulated nature of the relationships between participants and the equal authorisation
       of users to make their own spontaneous contributions constitute the communicative pat-
       tern that was originally supposed to be the hallmark of the new media. Today, this great
       emancipatory promise is being drowned out by the desolate cacophony in fragmented,
       self-enclosed echo chambers.                          
        The new pattern of communication has given rise to two remarkable effects for the
       structural transformation of the public sphere. At first, the new media seemed to herald
       at last the fulfilment of the egalitarian-universalistic claim of the bourgeois public sphere
       to include all citizens equally. These media promised to lend all citizens their own pub-
       licly perceptible voice and even to equip it with mobilising power. They would free users
       from the receptive role of addressees who choose between a limited number of

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      160                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      programmes and would enable every individual to make his or her voice heard in the
      anarchic exchange of spontaneous opinions. But the lava of this at once anti-authoritar-
      ian and egalitarian potential, which was still discernible in the Californian founding spirit
      of the early years, soon solidified in Silicon Valley into the libertarian grimace of world-
      dominating digital corporations. Moreover, the worldwide organisational potential
      offered by the new media is at the service of radical right-wing networks as well as the
      courageous Belarusian women in their sustained protest against Lukashenko. One effect
      is the self-empowerment of media users; the other is the price the latter pay for being
      released from the editorial tutelage of the old media as long as they have not yet learned
      to make good use of the new media. Just as printing made everyone a potential reader,
      today digitalisation is making everyone into a potential author. But how long did it take
      until everyone was able to read?                       
        The platforms do not offer their emancipated users any substitute for the professional
      selection and discursive examination of contents based on generally accepted cognitive
      standards. This is why there is currently so much talk of the eroding gatekeeper model of
      the mass media.15 This model in no way implies the disenfranchisement of media users;
      it merely describes a form of communication that can enable citizens to acquire the nec-
      essary knowledge and information so that each of them can form his or her own opinion
      about problems in need of political regulation. A politically appropriate perception of the
      author role, which is not the same as the consumer role, tends to increase the awareness
      of deficits in one’s own level of knowledge. The author role also has to be learned; and
      as long as this has not been realised in the political exchange in social media, the quality
      of uninhibited discourse shielded from dissonant opinions and criticism will continue to
      suffer. This is what first gives rise to the danger of fragmentation for political opinion
      and will formation in the political community in connection with a simultaneously
      unbounded public sphere. The boundless communication networks that spontaneously
      take shape around certain topics or individuals can spread centrifugally while simultane-
      ously condensing into communication circuits that dogmatically seal themselves off
      from each other. Then the trends towards fragmentation and the dissolution of bounda-
      ries reinforce each other to create a dynamic that counteracts the integrating power of the
      communication context of the nationally centred public spheres established by the press,
      radio and television. Before going into this dynamic in greater detail, I would first like to
      review how the share of social media in the overall media offerings has evolved.
      V                                                      
      Empirically speaking, the impact of the introduction of the internet, and of social media
      in particular, on the formation of opinion and will in the public sphere is not easy to cir-
      cumscribe. However, the findings of the long-term study on media use in Germany con-
      ducted by the national broadcasters for the period from 1964 to 2020 permit some rough
      conclusions about changes in the media offerings and how they are used.16 There was a
      considerable expansion of offerings, first as a result of the introduction of private televi-
      sion, and then above all as a result of the wide range of online options. This holds not
      only for the national level, since the internet also makes a large number of ‘foreign’
      press, radio and television programmes available. Interested people from around the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      161     
                                                             
       world were able to watch the storming of the Capitol live on CNN. Correspondingly, the
       time budget invested in daily media consumption has ballooned. The usage time for all
       media has risen sharply since 2000, but peaked in 2005; since then, it has levelled off at
       a saturation level of an astounding eight hours a day. The proportions of the different
       media have shifted over the decades. Since 1970, the use of the then-new medium of
       television overtook that of the traditional media of daily newspapers and radio. But even
       since online competition became clearly felt from the year 2000 onwards, television and
       radio still claim the greatest reach. Book consumption also remained quite stable, with
       fluctuations, between 1980 and 2015. What must be emphasised in our context is that, in
       contrast, the corresponding reach of daily newspapers underwent a steady decline since
       the introduction of television, from 69 per cent in 1964 to 33 per cent in 2015. The slump
       since the introduction of new media is reflected in the dramatic decline in the reach of
       printed newspapers and magazines from 60 per cent in 2005 to 22 per cent in 2020. This
       trend will continue at an accelerated rate, given that 40 per cent of people in the age
       group of 14 to 29-year-olds were still reading printed newspapers or magazines in 2005,
       compared with 6 per cent in the same age group in 2020. At the same time, the reading
       intensity has decreased: While the average reader spent 38 minutes a day reading daily
       newspapers in 1980 (and 11 minutes reading magazines), the average daily reading time
       decreased to 23 minutes in 2015 (or 11 minutes for magazines), and to 15 minutes in
       2020 (for newspapers and magazines combined). Of course, newspaper consumption has
       also shifted to the internet; but aside from the fact that reading digitalised texts presum-
       ably does not demand the same level of intensive attention and analytical processing as
       does reading printed texts, the apps or podcasts of the corresponding online offerings
       cannot fully compensate for the offerings of daily newspapers. The daily time spent read-
       ing digital texts among the population as a whole – 18 minutes in total, 6 minutes of
       which are spent on newspapers and magazines – is an indicator of this.
        The most recent representative Eurobarometer of the populations of the then 28 EU
       countries, which was conducted at the end of 2019, confirms the current scale of the
       availability and use of the various media: on a daily basis, 81 per cent of respondents use
       television, 67 per cent the internet in general, 47 per cent social media, 46 per cent radio
       and 26 per cent the press, compared to the 38 per cent proportion of daily newspaper
       readers in 2010. The Eurobarometer records daily use of social media separately from
       that of the internet in general, and this share has risen astonishingly rapidly from 18 per
       cent of all respondents in 2010 to 48 per cent currently. Interestingly, television and, at a
       lower level, radio also maintain their leading role in the demand for ‘political informa-
       tion on national affairs’. In this connection, 77 per cent of those surveyed name televi-
       sion, 40 per cent radio and 36 per cent the print media as their ‘main sources of
       information’, while 49 per cent cite the internet in general and 20 per cent social media.
       The fact that this figure, which is of interest in the present context, has already risen by
       a further four points compared to the previous year’s survey confirms the increasing
       trend also documented elsewhere. In any case, the drastic decline in the consumption of
       daily newspapers and magazines is also an indicator that, since the introduction of the
       internet, the average amount of attention paid to political news and the analytical pro-
       cessing of politically relevant issues have declined. Nonetheless, the relative stability of
       the share of television and radio also in media consumption in general suggests that, for

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      162                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      the time being, these two media are providing reliable and sufficiently diverse political
      information to at least three-quarters of the electorate in the EU member states.
        This makes another trend all the more striking. Evidently, the increasing infiltration of
      the public sphere by fake news, especially the spectacular development towards a ‘post-
      truth democracy’ that became the alarming normality in the US under the Trump admin-
      istration, has also reinforced distrust in the media in Europe. Forty-one per cent of
      respondents doubt that the reporting of the national media is free from political and
      economic influence; 39 per cent of respondents explicitly affirm this distrust with regard
      to the public media that today form the backbone of a liberal public sphere; and as many
      as 79 per cent claim that they have encountered distorted or false news.
        These data provide information about the changes in the spectrum of available media
      and their use; however, they only provide indirect indicators of the quality of the public
      opinions formed on this basis and of the extent of citizens’ involvement in the process of
      opinion and will formation. Therefore, I must confine myself to educated conjectures.
      On the one hand, the dramatic loss of relevance of the print media compared to the domi-
      nant audio-visual media seems to point to a declining level of aspiration of the offerings,
      and hence also for the fact that the citizens’ receptiveness and intellectual processing of
      politically relevant news and problems are on the decline. This diagnosis is confirmed,
      by the way, by how the politically leading daily and weekly newspapers have adapted to
      the ‘colourful’ format of entertaining Sunday newspapers. On the other hand, the partici-
      pant observer finds daily evidence that what is left of the more sophisticated national
      newspapers and magazines still functions as the leading political media from which the
      other media, especially television, continue to take over the reflected contributions and
      authoritative positions on the main topics. However, mistrust in the truth, seriousness
      and completeness of the programmes is increasing among the general population in
      Germany, even though each of the two leading public television and radio channels con-
      tinues to ensure a reliable supply of news and political programmes. The growing doubts
      about the quality of the state-financed media seem to correspond to the increasingly
      widespread conviction that the political class is either unreliable or corrupt, or is at any
      rate suspect. This general picture suggests that, on the one hand, the diversity of the
      media on the supply side, and a corresponding pluralism of opinions, arguments and
      perspectives on life, fulfil important preconditions for the long-term formation of critical
      opinions that are immune to prejudice; but that, on the other hand, the increasing disso-
      nance of a strident diversity of voices and the complexity of the challenging topics and
      positions is leading a growing minority of media consumers to use digital platforms to
      retreat into shielded echo chambers of the like-minded. For the digital platforms not only
      invite their users to spontaneously generate intersubjectively confirmed worlds of their
      own but seem to lend the stubborn internal logic of these islands of communication, in
      addition, the epistemic status of competing public spheres. But before we can assess this
      subjective side of the changes in recipients’ attitudes as a result of the media offerings,
      we must first examine the economic dynamics, that increasingly distort subjective per-
      ceptions of the editorial public sphere. For the idiosyncratic character of these modes of
      reception fostered by social media should not blind us to the economic anchoring of the
      roughly outlined, and for the time being politically largely unregulated, transformation
      of the structure of the media.                         

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      163     
                                                             
       VI                                                    
       The description of platforms as ‘media offerings for networking communicative content
       across arbitrary distance’ is, in view of the far from neutral performance of algorithm-
       steered platforms such as Facebook, YouTube, Instagram and Twitter, if not naïve, at
       least incomplete. For these new media are companies that obey the imperatives govern-
       ing the valorisation of capital and are among the most highly quoted corporations on the
       stock exchange. They owe their profits to exploiting data, which they sell for advertising
       purposes (or otherwise as goods). These data consist of information that accrue as by-
       products of their user-oriented offerings in the form of the personal data their customers
       leave behind on the internet (now subject to formal consent). Newspapers are also gener-
       ally privately owned companies that are financed to a large extent by revenues from
       advertising. But while the old media are themselves the advertising vehicles, the kind of
       value creation that has provoked criticism of ‘surveillance capitalism’ (see Zuboff, 2018)
       feeds on commercially exploitable information that is randomly ‘captured’ by other
       services and in turn enables individualised advertising strategies (see Fuchs, 2021). On
       this algorithm-controlled path, social media also foster a further advance towards the
       commodification of lifeworld contexts.                
        However, I am interested in a different aspect, namely the pressure to adapt that the
       exploitation logic of the new media exerts on the old media. The latter were suitable as
       vehicles for advertising only insofar as their contents were commercially successful;
       however, these contents themselves inherently obey a completely different logic –
       namely, the demand for texts and programmes whose form and content must satisfy
       cognitive, normative or aesthetic standards. That readers and audiences evaluate journal-
       istic performances according to such epistemic standards (broadly understood) becomes
       immediately apparent once we grasp – from the philosophical perspective of analysis of
       the lifeworld – the important function that the media fulfil in providing orientation in the
       increasingly confusing ‘media society’. In view of the complexity of society, the media
       are the intermediary which, in the diversity of perspectives of social situations and cul-
       tural forms of life, whittle out an intersubjectively shared core from among the compet-
       ing interpretations of the world and validate it as generally rationally accepted. Of
       course, the press, with its classic threefold division of newspaper contents into politics,
       business and feature pages, is never the final authority regarding the truth or correctness
       of individual statements or canonical interpretations of facts, of the plausibility of gen-
       eral assessments, even of the soundness of standards or procedures of judgement. But
       with their daily stream of new information and interpretations, the media constantly con-
       firm, correct and supplement the blurred everyday image of a world that is presumed to
       be objective, and which virtually all contemporaries assume is also accepted by every-
       one else as ‘normal’ or valid.                        
        The informative article by Ottfried Jarren and Renate Fischer (2021) explains why the
       advance towards the ‘platformisation of the public sphere’ is creating difficulties for the
       traditional media, both economically and in view of dwindling journalistic influence and
       the weakening of professional standards. Since there is a correlation between circulation
       and advertising revenues, the decline in demand for printed newspapers and magazines
       is jeopardising the economic basis of the press; and thus far the press has not found a
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      164                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      really successful business model for commercial sales of digital formats, since on the
      internet it is in competition with new media that offer their users corresponding informa-
      tion free of charge. The result is cutbacks and precarious employment conditions with
      negative effects on the quality and scope of editorial work. But the losses in the advertis-
      ing and audience stakes are not the only factors that mitigate the relevance and interpre-
      tive power of the press. Adjusting to the competition on the internet calls for changes in
      how journalists work. Even if the ‘audience turn’, i.e. the greater involvement of the
      audience and an increased sensitivity to the reactions of readers, are not necessarily dis-
      advantages, the trends towards deprofessionalisation and the understanding of journalis-
      tic work as a neutral, depoliticised service – as a matter of managing data and attention
      rather than of targeted research and precise interpretation – are intensifying: ‘As a result,
      newsrooms, previously places of political debate, are being transformed into coordina-
      tion centres for the sourcing and the management of the production and distribution of
      content’ (see Jarren and Fischer, 2021: 370). The change in professional standards is a
      reflection of the adaptation of the press, whose greatest inherent affinity is for the discur-
      sive formation of public opinions and political will by the citizens, to the commercial
      services of platforms that are vying for the attention of consumers. With the triumph of
      the imperatives of the attention economy, however, the new media are also reinforcing
      the trends long familiar from the tabloid and mass press towards entertainment and the
      affective charging and personalisation of the issues with which the political public sphere
      is increasingly concerned.                             
        With the alignment of political programmes with offers of entertainment and con-
      sumption addressed to the citizens as consumers, we touch on trends towards depolitici-
      sation that have been observed in media research since the 1930s, but which are evidently
      intensifying as a result of the availability of social media. Only when we turn our atten-
      tion away from the objective side of the expanded structure of the media and its trans-
      formed economic basis towards the side of the recipients and their changed modes of
      reception do we touch on the central question of whether social media are changing how
      their users perceive the political public sphere. Of course, the technical advantages of
      commercial platforms, and even of a medium like Twitter that compels its users to pro-
      duce concise messages, offer the users benefits for political, professional and private
      purposes. But these advances are not our topic. Our question is rather whether, through
      the changed mode of use, these platforms also prompt a kind of exchange about implic-
      itly or explicitly political views that could influence the perception of the political public
      sphere as such. Philipp Staab and Thorsten Thiel (in this special issue) refer with
      regard to the subjective aspect of the use of the new media to Andreas Reckwitz’s the-
      ory of the ‘society of singularities’ and, in particular, the incentives that the activating
      platforms provide their users for narcissistic self-presentation and the ‘staging of singu-
      larity’ (Reckwitz, 2020). If we make a clear distinction between ‘individualisation’ and
      ‘singularisation’ – that is, between the distinctiveness that individuals acquire through
      their life history and the visibility and gain in distinction they can achieve through spon-
      taneous contributions on the internet – then the ‘promise of singularisation’ may be the
      correct term for influencers who court the approval of followers for their own pro-
      gramme and reputation. Be that as it may, when it comes to the contribution that social
      media make to the formation of opinion and will in the political public sphere, another

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      165     
                                                             
       aspect of reception seems more important to me. As has been frequently observed, the
       spontaneously self-directed and fragmented public spheres that split off both from the
       editorial or official public sphere and from each other generate a pull towards self-refer-
       ential reciprocal confirmation of interpretations and opinions. If, however, the experi-
       ence and perception of those involved in these milieus of what was hitherto called the
       public sphere and the political public sphere were to change, and if the hitherto custom-
       ary conceptual distinction between private and public spheres were to be affected, this
       would necessarily have far-reaching consequences for the self-understanding of internet
       consumers as citizens. For the present we lack the data to test this hypothesis; but the
       indicators that prompt such a hypothesis are troubling enough.
        The social basis for the legal and political differentiation of the public sphere from the
       private sphere of economic, civic and family intercourse has not undergone any struc-
       tural change during the period under consideration, for the capitalist economic form is
       itself based on this separation. In constitutional democracies, this structure has also been
       reflected in the consciousness of citizens. And their perception is the crucial issue.
       Citizens are expected to make their political decisions in the field of tension between
       self-interest and the orientation towards the common good. As we have seen, this tension
       is played out in the space of a political public sphere that as a matter of principle includes
       all citizens as a potential audience. The very fact that public streams of communication
       flow through editorial sluices sets them apart from all private and business contacts.
       Different standards apply to the composition of printed matter addressed to an anony-
       mous reading public than to private correspondence, which for a long time was still writ-
       ten by hand.17 What is constitutive of the public sphere is not the disparity between active
       and passive participation in discourse, but rather the topics that deserve shared interest
       and the respective professionally examined form and rationality of the contributions that
       promote mutual understanding about common and different interests. The spatial meta-
       phor of the distinction between private and public ‘spaces’ should not mislead us; the
       decisive factor is the perception of the threshold (itself politically contested) between
       private matters and public issues that are discussed in the political public sphere. This
       perception is also shared by the social movements that create counterpublics to combat
       the narrowing of vision of the media public. Apart from the reference to the central politi-
       cal authority that has the power to act, it is the form and relevance of the selected edito-
       rial contributions that attract the attention of the audience. And this expectation of the
       reliability, quality and general relevance of public contributions is also constitutive for
       the perception of the inclusive character of a public sphere that is supposed to direct the
       attention of all citizens to the same topics in order to both stimulate and enable each of
       them to make their own judgements in accordance with the recognised standards about
       the relevant issues for political decision-making.18  
        It is true that, since the emergence of ‘media societies’, nothing essential has changed
       in the social basis for such a separation of the public sphere from the private spheres of
       life. Nonetheless, the more or less exclusive use of social media may have led in parts of
       the population to a change in the perception of the public sphere that has blurred the
       distinction between ‘public’ and ‘private’, and thus the inclusive meaning of the public
       sphere. In the literature in communication studies, one increasingly encounters observa-
       tions of a trend away from traditional perceptions of the political public sphere and

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      166                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      politics itself (see Bennett and Pfetsch, 2018). In certain subcultures, the public sphere is
      no longer perceived as being inclusive, and the political public sphere is no longer seen
      as a space of communication for a generalisation of interests that includes all citizens.
      Therefore, I will try to explain a hypothesis and render it plausible as such.19 As men-
      tioned, the internet opens up virtual spaces of which users can take immediate possession
      as authors in a new way. Social media create freely accessible public spaces that invite
      all users to make interventions that are not checked by anyone – and which, as it happens,
      have also long enticed politicians to exert direct personalised influence on the voting
      public. This plebiscitary ‘public sphere’, which has been stripped down to ‘like’ and ‘dis-
      like’ clicks, rests on a technical and economic infrastructure. But in these freely acces-
      sible media spaces, all users who are, as it were, released from the need to satisfy the
      entry requirements to the editorial public sphere and, from their point of view, have been
      freed from ‘censorship’, can in principle address an anonymous public and solicit its
      approval. These spaces seem to acquire a peculiar anonymous intimacy: according to
      previous standards, they can be understood neither as public nor as private, but rather as
      a sphere of communication that had previously been reserved for private correspondence
      but is now inflated into a new and intimate kind of public sphere.
        Users empowered as authors provoke attention with their messages, because the
      unstructured public sphere is first created by the comments of readers and the likes of
      followers. Insofar as this leads to the formation of self-supporting echo chambers, these
      bubbles share with the classical public sphere their porousness to further networking; at
      the same time, however, they differ from the fundamentally inclusive character of the
      public sphere – and the contrast to the private sphere – through their rejection of disso-
      nant and the inclusion of consonant voices into their own limited, identity-preserving
      horizon of supposed, yet professionally unfiltered, ‘knowledge’. From a point of view
      fortified by the mutual confirmation of their judgements, claims to universality extend-
      ing beyond their own horizons become fundamentally suspect of hypocrisy. From the
      limited perspective of such a semi-public sphere, the political public sphere of constitu-
      tional democracies can no longer be perceived as an inclusive space for possible discur-
      sive clarification of competing claims to truth and the generalisation of interests; precisely
      this public sphere, which hitherto presented itself as inclusive, is then downgraded to one
      of the semi-public spheres competing on an equal footing.20
        One symptom of this is the twofold strategy of spreading fake news while simultane-
      ously combating the ‘lying press’, which in turn unsettles the public and the leading
      media themselves (Jaster and Lanius, 2020). But when the shared space of ‘the political’
      degenerates into the battleground of competing publics, the democratically legitimised,
      state-enforced political programmes provoke conspiracy theories – as in the case of the
      anti-Corona virus demonstrations, which are staged in a libertarian spirit but are in fact
      driven by authoritarian motives. These tendencies can already be observed in member
      states of the European Union; but they can even take hold of and deform the political
      system as such, if that has been undermined and riven long enough by social-structural
      conflicts. In the United States, politics has become trapped in the maelstrom of persistent
      polarisation of the public sphere after the administration and large sections of the ruling
      party adapted to the self-perception of a president who was successful on social media
      and sought the plebiscitary approval of his populist following on a daily basis via

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      167     
                                                             
       Twitter.21 The – we can only hope, temporary – disintegration of the political public
       sphere found expression in the fact that, for almost half the population, communicative
       contents could no longer be exchanged in the currency of criticisable validity claims. It
       is not the accumulation of fake news that is significant for a widespread deformation of
       the perception of the political public sphere, but the fact that fake news can no longer
       even be identified as such (see Hohlfeld, 2020).      
        In the communication and social sciences, it is now commonplace to speak of dis-
       rupted public spheres that have become detached from the journalistically institutional-
       ised public sphere. But scholarly observers would be mistaken to conclude that the
       description of these symptomatic phenomena should be separated from questions of
       democratic theory altogether.22 After all, communication in independent semi-public
       spheres is itself by no means depoliticised; and even where that is the case, the formative
       power of this communication for the world view of those involved is not apolitical. A
       democratic system is damaged as a whole when the infrastructure of the public sphere
       can no longer direct the citizens’ attention to the relevant issues that need to be decided
       and, moreover, ensure the formation of competing public opinions – and that means
       qualitatively filtered opinions. If we recall the complex preconditions of the survival of
       inherently crisis-prone capitalist democracies, it is indeed clear that there may be deeper
       reasons for a loss of function of the political public sphere. But that does not exempt us
       from looking for obvious reasons.                     
        I see one such reason in the coincidence of the emergence of Silicon Valley, i.e. the
       commercial use of the digital network, on the one hand, and the global spread of the
       neoliberal economic programme, on the other. The globally expanded zone of free flows
       of communication, originally made possible by the invention of the technical structure of
       the ‘net’, presented itself from the outset as the mirror image of an ideal market. This
       market did not even need to be deregulated. In the meantime, however, this suggestive
       image is being disrupted by the algorithmic control of communication flows that is feed-
       ing the concentration of market power of the large internet corporations. The skimming
       and digital processing of customers’ personal data, which are more or less inconspicu-
       ously exchanged for the information provided free of charge by search engines, news
       portals and other services, explains why the EU Competition Commissioner would like
       to regulate this market. But competition law is the wrong approach if one’s goal is to
       correct the basic error that platforms, unlike traditional media, do not want to assume
       liability for the dissemination of truth-sensitive, and hence deception-prone, communi-
       cative contents. The fact that the press, radio and television, for example, are obliged to
       correct false reports draws attention to the fact of interest in the present context. Because
       of the special nature of their goods, which are not mere commodities, the platforms can-
       not evade all duties of journalistic care.            
        They, too, are responsible and should be liable for news that they neither produce nor
       edit; for this information also has the power to shape opinions and mentalities. First and
       foremost, it is not subject to the quality standards of commodities, but to the cognitive
       standards of judgements without which for us there can be neither the objectivity of the
       world of facts nor the identity and commonality of our intersubjectively shared world.23
       In a hard-to-imagine ‘world’ of fake news that could no longer be identified as such, i.e.
       in which it could not be distinguished from true information, no child would be able to

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      168                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      grow up without developing clinical symptoms. Therefore, maintaining a media struc-
      ture that ensures the inclusive character of the public sphere and the deliberative charac-
      ter of the formation of public opinion and political will is not a matter of political
      preference but a constitutional imperative.            
                                      Translated by Ciaran Cronin
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. See Peters (1993, 2008); from this perspective, see also Wessler (2018).
      2. On the relationship between political and literary public spheres, see the sideways glance in
        Habermas (2018 [2016]).                              
      3. The chapter on the role of civil society and the political public sphere in Between Facts
        and Norms (Habermas, 1996: 329–387) takes up the reflections in the final chapter of The
        Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere, and especially in the introduction to the
        new German edition of 1991 (Habermas, 1992). For my most recent reflections on this, see
        Habermas (2009).                                     
      4. Usually, however, sociological theories choose a basic conceptual approach that leaves the
        cognitive meaning of this dimension of validity out of account and attributes the binding
        effect of ought-validity [Sollgeltung] to the threat of sanctions.
      5. The text of the French Constitution of September 1791 opens with a catalogue that distin-
        guishes between droits naturels and droits civils. In this way, it took into account the temporal
        discrepancy that exists between the current domain of validity of the general civil rights and
        the as yet unrealised claim to validity, extending far beyond the territorial boundaries of the
        French state, of the ‘natural’ rights to which all persons have an equal claim in virtue of their
        humanity. Paradoxically, however, the human and civil rights that have been institutionalised
        as fundamental rights preserve the meaning of universal rights within national borders as
        well. In this way, they remind the present and future generations, if not of a self-obligation
        to actively propagate these rights, then at least of the peculiar character of the context-tran-
        scending normative content of universal human rights beyond the provisionality of their at
        present territorially restricted implementation. The moral surplus also leaves traces of an as
        yet unexhausted normative content in the existing basic rights, which exhibit something of
        the troubling character of an unsaturated norm. The lack of ‘saturation’ concerns the temporal
        dimension of the exhaustion – still to be achieved in the political community and still to be
        specified as regards its content – of the indeterminately context-transcending substance of
        established fundamental rights, as well as the spatial dimension of a still outstanding world-
        wide implementation of human rights.                 
      6. See the contribution of Martin Seeliger and Sebastian Sevignani, ‘The New Structural
        Transformation of the Public Sphere?’, in this special issue, where they specify this role in
        terms of the transparency of public issues, the general orientation of citizens and the recipro-
        cal justification of topics and contributions.       
      7. Normatively speaking, the so-called output legitimacy of government action that keeps citi-
        zens happy does not meet the conditions of democratically legitimate action; for although
        such services of the state coincide with citizens’ interests, they do not satisfy the latter by
        executing a democratically formed will of the citizens themselves.
      8. See my review of Cristina Lafont, Democracy without Shortcuts (Habermas, 2020).
      9. Article 20 para. 2 of the Basic Law, the German federal constitution, declares that ‘All state
        authority is derived from the people.’ [Trans.]      
      10. On the political concept of solidarity, see Habermas (2015: 98–100).

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      169     
                                                             
       11. The phenomenon of contemporary right-wing populism illustrates how, in reasonably stable
         democracies, the steep normative gradient between the idea of deliberative politics, on the
         one hand, and the sobering reality of opinion and will formation, on the other, is anchored
         in social reality itself through the intuitions of the citizens. We have long been able to form a
         realistic picture of how political opinions and will are shaped as a result of empirical studies
         on voting behaviour, the level of information and political awareness of the population, on
         the parties’ professional election advertising, public relations, campaign strategies, etc.; but
         neither these facts themselves nor knowledge of them normally shake the assumption of the
         active and passive electorate that the ‘will of the voters’, whether one agrees with the outcome
         or not, is sufficiently respected and sets the course for future policies. As the talk of ‘system
         parties’ shows, however, even such forbearing normative assumptions can become inverted
         into their opposite if confidence in them among the population at large is enduringly shaken.
         Then ‘we’ are the people who know what is true and what is false, while a bridge cannot be
         constructed to the ‘others’, even with arguments.   
       12. In contemporary German public discourse, ‘die Abgehängten’ refers to groups of citizens who
         for various reasons feel disconnected from the political process or abandoned by the main-
         stream political parties and, in recent years, have tended to identify with or actively support
         mainly right-wing opposition movements (such as those that rallied against the public meas-
         ures to combat the COVID-19 pandemic) and political parties (in particular the Alternative
         for Germany). [Trans.]                              
       13. See Philipp Staab and Thorsten Thiel, ‘Commercial Politicisation and Social Media: Digital
         Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere’, in this special issue.
       14. The global expansion of accelerated and multiplied communication flows leads Claudia Ritzi
         to suggest that, rather than the image of centre and periphery, ‘the concept of the “universe”
         should be used as a metaphor to describe contemporary political publics. It generates an
         awareness of the unboundedness of the contemporary public space’ (Ritzi, 2021: 305).
       15. See Sebastian Sevignani, ‘Digital Transformations and the Ideological Formation of the
         Public Spheres: Hegemonic, Populist, or Popular Communication?’, in this special issue.
       16. In the following, I am relying on my correspondence with – and on the interpretive proposals
         of – Jürgen Gerhards, who drew my attention to the results of the ARD/ZDF long-term study
         on mass communication between 1964 and 2020. The autumn 2019 Eurobarometer provides
         additional data that permit further conclusions.    
       17. A consistent exception to this is, of course, literary correspondence, which – as the pertinent
         example of the Romantics demonstrates – satisfies aesthetic standards and thus also a public
         interest.                                           
       18. I regret that the set framework did not allow me to address the more far-reaching reflections
         of Hans-Jörg Trentz (2021).                         
       19. For an illustrative account, see Barthelmes (2020, esp. ch. 7, pp. 128–155).
       20. The milieu of this ‘semi-public sphere’ can be described equally well as a semi-privatised
         public sphere. Philipp Staab and Thorsten Thiel capture this character in this special issue.
       21. On Trump and fake news, see Oswald (2020).        
       22. For a plausible statement of the position, see Berg, Rakowski and Thiel (2020).
       23. Anyone who sees through this connection will recognise the ultimately authoritarian char-
         acter, aimed at the foundations of a discursive public sphere, of the contemporary rampant
         criticism of the facilities and programme scope of the public broadcasters. Together with
         the quality press, whose economic basis can probably soon be secured only with the help of
         public support, the television and radio broadcasters are for the time being resisting the pull
         of a ‘platformisation’ of the public sphere and a commodification of public consciousness. On
         this, see Fuchs (2021).                             

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      170                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      References                                             
      Barthelmes, Andreas (2020) Die große Zerstörung: Was der digitale Bruch mit unserem Leben
        macht. Berlin: Duden Verlag.                         
      Bennett, W. Lance and Pfetsch, Barbara (2018) Rethinking political communication in a time of
        disrupted public spheres. Journal of Communication 68(2): 243–253.
      Berg, Sebastian, Rakowski, Niklas, and Thiel, Thorsten (2020) Die digitale Konstellation:
        Eine Positionsbestimmung. Zeitschrift für Politikwissenschaft 30: 171–191. https://doi.
        org/10.1007/s41358-020-00207-6                       
      Forst, Rainer (2013) Toleration in Conflict: Past and Present, trans. Ciaran Cronin. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Fuchs, Christian (2021) Soziale Medien und Öffentlichkeit. In: Das digitale Kapital: Zur Kritik
        der politischen Ökonomie des 21. Jahrhunderts. Wien: Mandelbaum, pp. 235–272.
      Gaus, Daniel (2013) Rational reconstruction as a method of political theory between social critique
        and empirical political science. Constellations 20(4): 553–570.
      Habermas, Jürgen (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
        Category of Bourgeois Society, trans. Thomas Burger and Frederick Lawrence. Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.                                       
      Habermas, Jürgen (1992) Further reflections on the public sphere. In: Calhoun, Craig (ed.)
        Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 421–461.
      Habermas, Jürgen (1995) On the internal relation between the rule of law and democracy. European
        Journal of Philosophy 3(1): 12–20.                   
      Habermas, Jürgen (1996) Between Facts and Norms, trans. William Rehg. Cambridge: Polity.
      Habermas, Jürgen (2006) Constitutional democracy – a paradoxical union of contradictory prin-
        ciples? In: Time of Transitions, trans. Ciaran Cronin and Max Pensky. Cambridge: Polity,
        pp. 113–128.                                         
      Habermas, Jürgen (2009) Political communication in media society: Does democracy still have
        an epistemic dimension? The impact of normative theory on empirical research. In: Europe
        – The Faltering Project, trans. Ciaran Cronin. Cambridge: Polity, pp. 138–183.
      Habermas, Jürgen (2012) The Crisis of the European Union, trans. Ciaran Cronin. Cambridge:
        Polity.                                              
      Habermas, Jürgen (2015) The Lure of Technocracy, trans. Ciaran Cronin. Cambridge: Polity.
      Habermas, Jürgen (2018 [2016]) Interview. In: Bächtiger, André, Dryzek, John S., Mansbridge,
        Jane, and Warren, Mark E. (eds) The Oxford Handbook of Deliberative Democracy. Oxford:
        Oxford University Press, pp. 871–882.                
      Habermas, Jürgen (2020) Review of Cristina Lafont, Democracy without Shortcuts. Journal of
        Deliberative Democracy 16(2): 10–14.                 
      Hohlfeld, Ralf (2020) Die Post-Truth-Ära: Kommunikation im Zeitalter von gefühlten Wahrheiten
        und Alternativen Fakten. In: Hohlfeld, Ralf, Harnischmacher, Michael, Heinke, Elfi, Lehner,
        Lea, and Sengl, Michael (eds) Fake News und Desinformation. Baden-Baden: Nomos,
        pp. 43–60.                                           
      Jarren, Ottfried and Fischer, Renate (2021) Die Plattformisierung von Öffentlichkeit und die
        Relevanzstruktur des Journalismus als demokratische Herausforderung. In: Seeliger, Martin,
        and Sevignany, Sebastian (eds) Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit? Baden-Baden:
        Nomos, pp. 365–384.                                  
      Jaster, Romy and Lanius, David (2020) Fake News in Politik und Öffentlichkeit. In: Hohlfeld,
        Ralf, Harnischmacher, Michael, Heinke, Elfi, Lehner, Lea, and Sengl, Michael (eds) Fake
        News und Desinformation. Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 245–269.

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Habermas                                      171     
                                                             
       Oswald, Michael (2020) Der Begriff ‘Fake News’ als rhetorisches Mittel des Framings in der
         politischen Kommunikation. In: Hohlfeld, Ralf, Harnischmacher, Michael, Heinke, Elfi,
         Lehner, Lea, and Sengl, Michael (eds) Fake News und Desinformation. Baden-Baden:
         Nomos, pp. 61–82.                                   
       Peters, Bernhard (1993) Die Integration moderner Gesellschaften. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
       Peters, Bernhard (2008) On public deliberation and public culture: Reflections on the public
         sphere. In: Wessler, Hartmut (ed.) Public Deliberation and Public Culture: The Writings of
         Bernhard Peters, 1993–2005. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 134–159.
       Reckwitz, Andreas (2020) The Society of Singularities, trans. Valentine A. Pakis. Cambridge:
         Polity.                                             
       Ritzi, Claudia (2021) Libration im Öffentlichkeitsuniversum. Anziehung und Kräfteausgleich in
         der digitalisierten Kommunikationsstruktur. In: Seeliger, Martin, and Sevignany, Sebastian
         (eds) Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit? Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 298-319.
       Schäfer, Armin (2015) Der Verlust politischer Gleichheit. Frankfurt am Main: Campus.
       Schäfer, Armin and Zürn, Michael (2021) Die demokratische Regression. Frankfurt am Main:
         Suhrkamp.                                           
       Steiner, Jürg, Bächtiger, André, Spörndli, Markus, and Steenbergen, Marco R. (2004) Deliberative
         Politics in Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Trentz, Hans-Jörg (2021) Öffentlichkeitstheorie als Erkenntnistheorie moderner Gesellschaft. In:
         Seeliger, Martin, and Sevignany, Sebastian (eds) Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit?
         Baden-Baden: Nomos, pp. 385–405.                    
       Wessler, Hartmut (2018) Habermas and the Media. Cambridge: Polity.
       Zuboff, Shoshana (2018) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
         the New Frontier of Power. New York: Public Affairs.
       Zürn, Michael (2021) ‘Öffentlichkeit und Global Governance’. In: Seeliger, Martin, and
         Sevignany, Sebastian (eds) Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit? Baden-Baden:
         Nomos, pp. 160–187.                                 
       Jürgen Habermas (b. 1929) is Emeritus Professor of Philosophy at Goethe University Frankfurt
       and one of the most influential living philosophers and social theorists. In addition to over 60
       books, many of which have appeared in translations into numerous languages, he recently pub-
       lished a monumental two-volume survey of the history of western philosophy, Auch eine
       Geschichte der Philosophie (Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2019).  
       This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘A New Structural
       Transformation of the Public Sphere?’, edited by Martin Seeliger and Sebastian
       Sevignani.                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             