[PAGE 1]
 1151133                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764221151133Theory, Culture & SocietyHaworth
                                                             
                                                             
       Global Public Life                                    
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Post-punk, Industrial Culture        2023, Vol. 40(7-8) 211 –235
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
       Zines, and the Information                            
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Dark Age                           sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121115511113333
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Christopher Haworth                                   
       University of Birmingham                              
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Several scholars have noted parallels between the online communicative tactics of the
       American alt-right and those of industrial musicians in the 1970s and 1980s. This article
       explores these connections further by analysing the informational media that industrial
       musicians developed. Between the mid-1980s and 1990s, these zines, handbooks, and
       websites made a strenuous break with the values of democracy, egalitarianism, and
       grassroots authenticity that were the default ideological ‘mode’ of DIY. Where the
       Californian ideology would centre the summer of love and the politics of the New
       Left, the zines ambiguously celebrated the nihilistic, authoritarian, and occult vectors
       of psychedelia – tendencies that have been associated with the late 1960s fate of the
       counterculture rather than its earlier heyday. The article tracks these themes from
       Vague magazine and Rapid Eye, to the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit in the 1990s, to
       neoreaction and the Dark Enlightenment, asking whether communicational utopianism
       should be considered a blip rather than the internet’s default state.
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       alt-right, Cybernetic Culture Research Unit, industrial culture, internet history, Nick
       Land, subcultural politics                            
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       Many journalists and scholars have noted the rapid transformation in fortunes the world-
       wide web has undergone in its short life, from early optimism about its power to turbo-
       charge participatory democracy through to more recent fears that it may have brought
       about democracy’s end. In Fred Turner’s (2019) account, the shift represents the
       far right’s exploitation of liberal efforts to decentralise media and reshape mass
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Christopher Haworth. Email: c.p.haworth@bham.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      212                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      communications around cybernetic and systems theoretical principles. ‘[T]hat effort’, he
      writes, is ‘animated by a deep faith that when engineering replaces politics, the alienation
      of mass society and the threat of totalitarianism will melt away [. . .]. Yet [e]ven as they
      grant us the power to communicate with others around the globe, our social media net-
      works have spawned a new form of authoritarianism’ (Turner, 2019). Some authors
      (Bridle, 2018; Hannah, 2021) have used the metaphor of an intellectual ‘dark age’ to
      describe the risks communications technologies pose to democracy (understood in terms
      of cultural and intellectual decline rather than a lack of historical sources). For Hannah
      (2021), ‘[w]hereas early Internet advocates predicted a utopian age of information access
      and literacy, the twenty-first century has witnessed a paradoxical technological expan-
      sion of communications technologies and, at the same time, the growth and spread of
      bizarre, vast, complex conspiracies’. Yet not all have been convinced of a solid distinc-
      tion between early and present-day web ideologies. Chun (2021: 7) reminds us that in
      1990s representations of cyberspace, dystopia was ‘the goal, not an error’. Rooted in the
      apocalyptic and Orientalist visions of cyberpunk, cyberspace figured the internet not as
      empowering-enabling but as an addictive and hallucinatory technology like that depicted
      in William Gibson’s Neuromancer, from which cyberspace famously took its name.
      Drawing attention to the settler-colonialist, frontier mythology that it animated, Chun
      writes that it ‘was the Wild West meets speed meets Yellow Peril meets capitalism on
      steroids. This bodiless exultation and stealthy, rebellious power explain why “pioneers”
      mislabelled the internet “cyberspace’” (Chun, 2021).   
        Indeed, to those for whom cyberculture was primarily an artistic concern, the con-
      sistencies between the information dark age and the giddy 1990s have proven to be
      more salient than the distinctions. Italian and Dutch new media scholars were quick to
      note the parallels between today’s far-right conspiracy theories online and ‘cultural
      sabotage’ techniques developed by ‘tactical media’ art groups active in Italy, Britain and
      the Netherlands – most notably in the case of QAnon and its links to the Italian media
      activists, Luther Blissett (Wu Ming 1, 2021). In its strange narrative about Donald
      Trump fighting to expose and punish a shadowy elite that controls society, the QAnon
      conspiracy bore narrative similarities to the novel ‘Q’ that the group collectively
      authored in 1999 – to the extent that the Twitter account of Wu Ming, a collective pseu-
      donym formed from a subset of Luther Blissett, suggested QAnon might be a Q-inspired
      prank invented to troll the alt-right (Wu Ming 1, 2018). Related to these currents has
      been the rediscovery of the 1990s British cybertheory collective the Cybernetic Culture
      Research Unit (CCRU) in the context of present-day accelerationism. In contrast to the
      extropian optimism of what Barbrook and Cameron (1995) famously termed the
      Californian ideology, the CCRU tried to bed down a gloomy, dystopian ‘British cyber-
      punk’ that emphasised the capacity of interconnected global media to generate disinfor-
      mation, political polarisation, and culture war. The critical theorist Benjamin Noys has
      written that this:                                     
        was a prescient thinking. Before our familiarity with the meme and the capacity of the global
        Internet to generate fake news [Nick] Land and the CCRU, drawing on science fiction and
        theory, had already captured something of the world to come. (Noys, 2022: 4)
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       213     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 1. (a) Throbbing Gristle cartoon strip, first published in Re/Search #6/7: in Industrial
       Culture Handbook (Vale and Juno, 1983), used with permission of Cosey Fan Tutti and Chris
       Cosey; (b) Pepe the Frog suicide meme, derived from KnowYourMeme.com (2016).
                                                             
       Closer examination of the subcultures that influenced artistic cybercultures like the
       CCRU closes the information utopianism-dystopian gap still further. Right after Trump’s
       election, Cramer (2016) linked the alt-right’s visual culture and uses of irony to the trans-
       gressive positions taken by ‘extreme’ industrial, noise, and neofolk groups active largely
       in Britain in the 1970s and 1980s. Figure 1 comparing a détourned comic strip by
       Throbbing Gristle (TG) with a Pepe the Frog meme displays the types of affinities he
       identified. In the suggestion that TG’s notorious ‘anti-music’ might drive someone to
       suicide, or that a frog might harbour suicidal ideations, there is clearly dark humour and
       irony. At the same time, they each hint at the psychological consequences of extreme
       politics: the TG strip through the presence of the group’s insignia (which famously
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      214                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      recalls the Nazi Schutzstaffel symbol), and the Pepe meme via the character’s assimila-
      tion into far-right symbolism. Yet considering their content alone is insufficient to under-
      standing how they signify. Appearing in the San Francisco-based zine Re/Search in 1983,
      the TG comic strip is unlikely to have been seen beyond fans of punk and industrial
      music. Thus, any audience is likely to be literate in its codes and therefore able to resolve
      its symbolic ambiguity as neither fascist nor pro-suicide. The same cannot be said of
      readers of Pepe memes, which thrive on platforms like Twitter where multiple perspec-
      tives are assimilated to one – a phenomenon danah boyd termed ‘context collapse’.1
      Indeed, the ability of Pepe to point in multiple directions at once was removed when it
      was added to the Anti-Defamation League’s database of hate symbols in 2016. And dif-
      ferences in political context also matter. Subcultural posturing in the 1970s and 1980s,
      when explicit far-right politics had no direct path to power in Britain and America, is not
      equivalent to the same gestures after the 2010s, when it does.
        However, one can perhaps charge the extreme music subcultures with complacency,
      in not being attuned to the threat the far right posed in the 1970s and 1980s. For if both
      the alt-right and extreme music subcultures made proliferate use of irony, then they
      equally provided subterfuge for those who, in the words of Tuters (2021: 173), use youth-
      cultural posturing ‘to dissimulate their true (political) intentions’. Indeed, reading the
      American Neo-Nazi Andrew Anglin describe his grift as ‘[n]on-ironic Nazism masquer-
      ading as ironic Nazism’ (O’Brien, 2017), it is hard to ignore the parallels with long-cel-
      ebrated extreme artists who used the cover of artistic libertarianism to toy with fascist
      aesthetics, and who since have been outed as ‘true believers’ (Tuters, 2021: 173) – Tony
      Wakeford of Death in June being the most famous case. The recent spate of exposés and
      ‘painful reflections’ published in the online music press attest to just how rapidly opinion
      has turned on underground music’s transgressive past in light of the growing influence of
      the far right.2                                        
        To date, these associations between past and present subcultures have gone unex-
      plored beyond superficial observations. Yet they raise an intriguing possibility: that in
      narrating the story of contemporary communications along the lines of a utopia spoiled,
      scholars may have overlooked alternative ideologies of media that provide equally
      compelling explanations for cultural politics in our digital present. This article explores
      this question by analysing the changing media ideologies and aesthetics that developed
      around British post-punk zines in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s, leading to the early
      subcultural embrace of the worldwide web. A key stepping-stone from past to present
      subcultures is the aforementioned Cybernetic Culture Research Unit (CCRU), whose
      lead figure Nick Land became an intellectual figurehead of the neoreaction subculture,
      considered a precursor to the alt-right (Kirchick, 2016). Noys’ assessment (cited earlier)
      of the CCRU’s prescience in a world of memes and fake news is widely shared among
      theorists, both advocates and critics. However, as this article shows, the media ideology
      they adopted was far from new. It was inherited practically wholesale, not from 1990s
      rave and jungle as is popularly assumed (Holt, 2019; Noys, 2014), but from left-liber-
      tarian new musick and industrial culture fanzines of the previous decade. During the
      mid-1980s these zines made a strenuous break with the values of democracy, egalitari-
      anism, and grassroots authenticity which were the default ideological ‘mode’ of DIY
      production, growing to concentrate instead on the romantic-visionary personae of the

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       215     
                                                             
       zines’ editors and their eclectic interests in esotericism and the occult. Where the
       Californian ideology would centre the summer of love and the politics of the New Left
       (or ‘new communalists’, Turner, 2006), the zines ambiguously celebrated the nihilistic,
       authoritarian, and occult vectors of psychedelia – tendencies that have been associated
       with the late 1960s and 1970s fate of the counterculture rather than its earlier heyday
       (Davis, 2014).                                        
        The data aesthetic that prevailed in these resources was the sublime-inflected quality
       of ‘immersion’ in esoteric phenomena. Knowledge acquisition was framed as at once a
       personal adventure in gnostic study and a suspension of criticality and reason. The con-
       figuration of the ‘user’ as an independent-minded knowledge seeker was of course ubiq-
       uitous in early internet culture, manifest in encyclopaedic links pages that point to strange
       and arcane destinations on the web, and traceable at least as far back as the Whole Earth
       Catalogue, with its emphasis on self-education (cf. Turner, 2006: 80). Yet the artistic
       libertarianism of the zines shifted the emphasis towards transgression through contact
       with censored or samizdat literature. Immersion therefore implies a kind of radicalisation
       through media. My contention is that this same rhetorical understanding of media can be
       found in online political subcultures of the present. The illustrations I discuss are Vague
       and Rapid Eye, two British post-punk-cum industrial culture zines from the 1980s; the
       subcultural web directory Internet. Underground.Guide; and the web 1.0 site for the
       Cybernetic Culture Research Unit. As well as demonstrating a direct line of historical
       influence from industrial culture zines to the CCRU, the artefacts show how consistent
       media imaginaries were remediated amid profound changes in their underlying condi-
       tions – from zines printed on paper, to links directories, to digital websites. Building on
       recent historical work on zines in Britain (Bland, 2018; Worley, 2015), my analysis
       shows how the zines developed into independent media entities in their own right, whose
       effects could be as influential as the groups they chronicled.
       From Post-punk to Cyberpunk: Vague                    
       Vague magazine was founded in 1979 at Salisbury College of Technology and Art by
       Tom Vague together with the illustrator Perry Harris and the photographer Iggy
       Zevenbergen. While most of the independent punk zines covered ‘real punk’, Vague fol-
       lowed the ‘more experimental or avant-garde’ strand that at the time would have been
       understood to lie between new wave and new musick (see Cateforis, 2011: 27), but ret-
       rospectively was categorised as post-punk. Vague’s first issue featured Siouxsie and the
       Banshees, Adam and the Ants, The Cure, The Specials, Madness, Swell Maps, and Red
       Crayola, with most of the features being interviews and reviews (Figure 2). Despite the
       differences in musical coverage, however, the zine’s aesthetic and ideological position-
       ing was closely related to the wider punk zine ecosystem which it distinguished itself
       from.3 It emphasised democracy, claiming to ‘create an alternative media in which ordi-
       nary people can get their views across’; egalitarianism, in its stated aim to try to ‘make
       this one relate to the layman more and not the big music scholars that read the music
       press’; and radical left politics, via its purported kinship with ‘the tradition of radical
       pamphlets’, in contrast to ‘DIY style mags or Big Issue prototypes’.4 Prefiguring the
       imaginary that would later be animated by the web, and that has been celebrated by
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      216                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 2. Cover of Vague 1, November 1979 edition, used with permission of Tom Vague.
                                                             
                                                             
      authors such as Shirky (2009) and Duncombe (1997), Vague therefore offered a kind of
      informational utopianism.                              
        Tom Vague later narrated the zine’s early period as one characterised by his own,
      ultimately failed, attempt to break into mainstream music journalism.5 Yet a series of
      changes pushed him away from this aim. The most important was the mutation of ele-
      ments of new wave and new musick into the more commercially oriented ‘new pop’.
      Adam Ant, the pre-eminent figure of the early Vague and the subject of Tom Vague’s
      unpublished book, pivoted strongly towards new pop, famously declaring to Sounds in
      1980 that ‘cult is just a safe word meaning “loser” [. . .] I want success’ (Reynolds, 2005:
      312). Seeking a more sustainable underground, Vague went the other way, leaning into
      the darker, more esoteric elements of new musick. Contemporary critics and historians
      often elide new musick with the later category of post-punk (see Cateforis, 2011;
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       217     
                                                             
       Reynolds, 2009 Beckett, 2016).6 Yet, as Haddon (2020: 25) notes, teleological readings
       of this kind smooth out the tensions and inconsistencies that were in play during the
       period when these terms were under negotiation. For Jon Savage, who alongside Jane
       Suck and Sandy Robertson coined the term, the definition was largely driven by the pop-
       avant-garde crossings of Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire, even if later they would
       be more enduringly associated with ‘industrial’. Reflecting in the Industrial Culture
       Handbook issue of Re/Search, itself an important influence on Vague and Rapid Eye,
       Savage described five principles that industrial took from new musick: organisational
       autonomy; access to information; use of synthesizers and anti-music; extra-musical ele-
       ments; and shock tactics. Savage’s description is useful for understanding the formal
       development of Vague, for two reasons. First, it imagines a non-hierarchical relationship
       between music and other media, where zines exceed their role as secondary ‘fan’ media
       to dwell in a flattened ‘information’ space of music, text and image. Second, it gives the
       zines a renewed purpose, from reports on scenes and subcultures to providing a platform
       for ‘extra-musical elements’, defined as ‘literary elements (discussed) in a thorough – as
       opposed to typical pop dilettantism – manner’ (Savage, 1983: 5). For new musick musi-
       cians, zines embracing ‘literary elements’ would provide a crucial plank of the crossover
       from pop into avant-garde. For magazines like Vague, it would supply them with an
       independent purpose untethered to the wax and wane of subcultural styles.
        After 1984 Vague shed the punk-ish cut-and-paste aesthetic, its design incorporating
       artistic photography and its commentary roving further into analysis of the urban envi-
       ronment, youth culture, Situationist theory, and anarchist politics. Vague was also forg-
       ing alliances with the fringes of other fields, many of which were central to the industrial
       universe. An issue from 1984, titled CONTROL DATA MANUAL: Programming
       Phenomena and Conspiracy Theory, lists conspiracy theories, William Burroughs, the
       Situationists, cyberpunk, Red Army Faction, Charles Manson, the occult, and Data
       Control as its features, suggesting an underground culture defined across literature, poli-
       tics, theory, the arts and theology (Vague, 1984). And where previously Vague himself
       had tended to disappear into the bands and scenes the zine chronicled, the new curatorial
       eclecticism served to turn attention towards his authorial persona, which increasingly
       resembled the ‘visionary’ romanticism of figures like William Burroughs and William
       Blake. What I want to highlight, however, is the aesthetic and ideological transforma-
       tions that the post-1984 ‘turn’ brought. Like most zines Vague had been hand cut-and-
       pasted, mixing image and text in a way that could occasionally be hard to read. However,
       with the departure from post-punk this collision of image and text became more oppres-
       sive and psychedelic – the images more solarised, the text often bordering on the illegi-
       ble. One piece in the 1984 issue demonstrates this atmosphere. In a review article on The
       Family: The Story of Charles Manson’s Dune Buggy Attack Battalion by Ed Sanders, the
       author Lucian K. Truscott IV describes the descent of the values of the counterculture
       into authoritarianism and ‘psychedelic fascism’:      
        Psychedelic fascism. In a way it was inevitable. The drugs, beginning in the fIower-power days
        of yesteryear, and their accompanying expanded consciousness, got weirder and weirder. As
        Ken Kesey predicted on the front of his bus in the early days, everything went further. (Truscott,
        1970)                                                
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      218                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 3. ‘Psychedelic Fascism’, Vague 18/19 (1984): CONTROL DATA MANUAL: Programming
      Phenomena and Conspiracy Theory, used with permission of Tom Vague.
                                                             
      The author predicts a growing ‘age of psychedelic fascism’ that, inaugurated by the
      Manson Family killings, was now incubating in the new religions of the early 1970s
      and the subcultural trend for video trading of snuff movies. His moral position is
      clearly expressed throughout in the warnings about ‘a locust-swarm of eviloids [sic]
      that are devouring some of the best young minds of the country at this very moment’.
      Yet its presentation in Vague makes it provocatively ambiguous. First, it is printed in
      black atop a dark red and white print of Manson’s face, which gives it an oppressive,
      immersive intermediality, making the text difficult to read and aestheticizing the con-
      cept of psychedelic fascism (Figure 3). Second, Truscott’s text is followed by an
      excerpt from Manson’s ‘Last Will and Judgement’, allowing Manson to have the final
      say on the killings, and implicitly making the murders into a two-sided affair that the
      reader can arbitrate between. The horrors of the Manson Family killings are first
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       219     
                                                             
       simulated in the détourned Truscott text, and then equivocated via the presentation of
       Manson’s response.                                    
        Although music was de-emphasised in the later Vague, projects like Psychic TV and
       the Temple Ov Psychick Youth still featured on the grounds that they were ideologically
       aligned. The nature of that alignment can be seen in the next, related illustration: Rapid
       Eye Movement.                                         
       Proto-web Occulture: Rapid Eye Movement               
                                                             
       Rapid Eye Movement (REM) was a contemporary of Vague, and there are similarities
       between the two. Both started in 1979 as new-wave-cum-new-musick zines, and both
       went in radically different, more experimental and literary directions, all but abandoning
       music in the 1980s. Both, too, were edited by writers with close relationships to the
       bands and musicians they wrote about – in REM’s case this was Simon Dwyer. Like
       Vague, Rapid Eye Movement stressed its commitment to independence and distinction
       from the mainstream music press, asserting that ‘we are not interested in sales graphs and
       charts [. . .] more ideas, less lists’ (Dwyer, 1979: 3). However, the zine undeniably had a
       more professional, more legitimate feel than Vague. Dwyer’s early writing on the anar-
       cho-punk band Crass landed him a job writing for the weekly music magazine Sounds,
       and this proximity to the mainstream meant he could draw on his contacts for interviews
       and articles at REM. The first issue featured a discussion between NME writers Julie
       Burchill and Tony Parsons, for instance, which lent the zine an overground legitimacy
       that Vague never achieved.                            
        The REM archive is spotty so it is difficult to assess how it developed after the first
       few instalments in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Those issues show a punk, anarcho-
       punk, and post-punk emphasis in coverage, which is framed by fine art photography
       bearing a Victorian gothic aesthetic (Figure 4). Sometime in the 1980s REM ceased,
       being relaunched as Rapid Eye in 1989. In keeping with Savage’s definition of industrial
       culture, the renewed zine embraced an expanded informational space as literature, poetry,
       philosophy, film, television, and visual art were introduced alongside or in place of
       music, and in issues that were closer in length to journals. This was aligned with an edi-
       torial-stylistic shift from ‘reportage’ to actively defining the culture that it addressed.
       This can be observed in the introduction to the first issue, in which Dwyer defines the
       category of ‘occulture’:                              
        This new word obviously suggests both Culture and the Occult. To me, this ‘oculture’ is not a
        secret culture as the word might suggest, but a culture that is in some way hidden and ignored,
        or wilfully marginalised to the extremities of our society. A culture of individuality and sub-
        cults, a culture of questions that have not been properly identified – let alone answered – and
        therefore, do not get a fair representation in the mainstream media. It is a culture that has been
        misinterpreted. Not because it is ‘evil’ or wrong, but because it is generally apolitical and
        amoral, unashamedly artistic, experimental, undogmatic, intellectual and oddly evolutionary. It
        is a sub-culture that is forming a question that ‘reality’ alone cannot answer. Which is why it
        makes people nervous. (Dwyer, 1989: 3)7              
       Going by the content of the first issue, the category of occulture traversed anti-human
       theory (William S. Burroughs, Brion Gysin), Western occultism (Aleister Crowley),
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      220                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 4. Rapid Eye Movement, Issue 1, Winter 1979.    
                                                             
      Eastern esotericism (Tantra), fictional or reality-hacking art movements (‘Situationism’,
      Neoism), outsider art (Austin Osman Spare), conspiracy theories (Nazi UFOs), experi-
      mental and ‘transgressive’ writers and artists (Kathy Acker, Derek Jarman, Mr Sebastian),
      new religions and cults (Charles Manson, Jim Jones and The People’s Temple of Christ).
      To the extent that music was covered, the focus was overwhelmingly on industrial music
      – particularly Psychic TV (PTV) and the associated artistic collective and self-styled
      ‘cult’, the Temple Ov Psychick Youth (TOPY). The appeal of these projects to the indus-
      trial culture and new musick zines was threefold. First, they can be seen to have per-
      formed the same extra-musical expansion that Rapid Eye and Vague had participated in,
      and that was described by Savage in the Industrial Culture Handbook. Although TOPY
      is often remembered as a secondary ‘fanclub’ to PTV, the relationship between the two
      was more complex, and certain TOPY ‘access points’ (city-based nodes in the TOPY
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       221     
                                                             
       mail network) were almost entirely independent of PTV and Genesis P-Orridge.8 Rapid
       Eye followed suit. It was the most forceful advocate for TOPY and PTV among the
       British industrial culture zines, and it reported on its activities as a magazine would.
       However, it was also an independent component in it, feeding in extra-musical contents.
       The concept of occulture, for instance, was absorbed by TOPY after Dwyer defined it. In
       this way, TOPY were seen to harbour the same relation to PTV as the reformed punk
       zines did to ‘popular music’ – as collaborators in a flattened-out information space.
        Second, TOPY and its related projects appealed on the grounds of their infamy and
       related under-representation in the mainstream press. Beyond Belief (Addicott, 1992), a
       Dispatches documentary, helped cement the view that TOPY were a depraved, brain-
       washed cult who engaged in erotic rituals mixing sex, violence, and child abuse. After
       this, mainstream outlets became nervous around the group, with record deals and pend-
       ing shows being cancelled and the police, HM Customs, Royal Mail and BT investigat-
       ing the group on separate grounds. To Rapid Eye and Vague, this secured their underground
       and countercultural credentials. Put simply, there was no danger of PTV migrating to the
       mainstream as Adam Ant had done in 1981.              
        Finally, TOPY represented a particular way of remembering the 1960s, which empha-
       sised the darker, more paranoid, anti-human qualities of the counterculture. This is best
       represented by Psychic TV’s 1985 single, ‘Godstar’. A tribute to the late Rolling Stone
       Brian Jones, the song both propagates the conspiracy theory that he was murdered rather
       than drowned, and tries to create a deity of him. Seen on TOPY’s own terms the song was
       a piece of cultural engineering that ‘hacks’ into mainstream media – the charts – in order
       to unsettle with images of conspiracy and cultism. Within Rapid Eye and Vague it offered
       one plank of an assemblage of references that, together with such artefacts as Charles
       Manson’s testimony to the courts about the Tate-LaBianca murder and William
       Burroughs’s anti-human literature, created a 1960s ‘darkside’.
       Occulture Remediated: From Zines to the Worldwide     
       Web                                                   
       Dwyer’s ‘occulture’ echoed Savage’s definition of industrial culture. Yet the coinage
       added something important, which was to frame the zine format less as a bearer of con-
       tent than as a particular kind of technology – one that, like the non-Western spiritualisms
       that often featured on its pages, demanded personal experience and discovery on the part
       of the user. This configuration of the zine audience as a ‘user’ rather than a ‘fan’ would
       be an important point of ideological contact between the zines of the 1980s and the early
       web. ‘Transitional’ media artefacts like Internet.Underground.Guide (Ludovico, 1995)
       integrated the two, fusing the zine with the more ‘practical’ technology of the hyperlinks
       directory, and privileging the arcane and hidden knowledge that could be found online.
       My final illustration shows how this same ethos was carried across to the web: it is the
       website belonging to the Cybernetic Culture Research Unit, and dating from 1999. The
       CCRU were a group of philosophy lecturers and PhD students based at Warwick
       University whose core group, at the time their website was created, included the cultural
       critic and music journalist Mark Fisher; the electronic musician and founder of Hyperdub
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      222                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      records Steve Goodman/Kode9; the theorist and art curator Suzanne Livingston; the
      media scholars Anna Greenspan and Luciana Parisi; and the philosopher Nick Land. As
      an academic research group whose discipline is philosophy, the CCRU stand out from
      the examples discussed so far, but from another perspective they are similar. First, music,
      and particularly the popular electronic dance music of the 1990s, was at the heart of the
      CCRU’s collective writing and thought, and it is in large part thanks to the later music-
      related activities of Goodman and Fisher that the group have received any attention at all.
      Second, although the group was born in an academic philosophy department, it acquired
      notoriety as an interdisciplinary art-theory collective operating beyond academia, an
      ethos that was embodied in the group’s publications, which were typically either zines or
      web texts – the former being sold in the same independent bookstores as Vague and
      Rapid Eye.9 Third, following the exit from academia the ‘research interests’ of the CCRU
      underwent a self-conscious shift from a postmodern mix of cybernetics, continental phi-
      losophy, dance music, sci fi and cyberpunk literature, feminism and gaming, to esoteri-
      cism and occulture.                                    
        This shift from academia to subculture was narrated by the CCRU themselves as a
      ‘descent into madness’. Later, those at the centre of things revealed it to have been partly
      driven by the real psychological breakdown experienced by the group’s academic lead,
      Nick Land.10 Either way, it had a strong literary-aesthetic dimension. The 1997 web page
      retrieved from the Wayback Machine (Figure 5), and advertising a work in progress
      seminar, shows the CCRU as an open, democratically organised group. By contrast, the
      independently hosted web page from the same year, produced following the group’s
      departure from the university, keeps the reader at a distance (Figure 5). Written in the
      third person, and offering cryptic evasions as to its function and membership (the group
      were anonymous in the style of tactical media groups like Luther Blissett), it presents the
      CCRU not as an open research group but as a clandestine and cult-like organisation.
      Although conveyed through radically different media, institutional arrangements, and
      organisational forms, the shift therefore mirrors that of the post-punk zines: from infor-
      mational democracy to enclosure and immersion.         
        Aesthetically and ludically, the post-university web presence clearly draws influ-
      ences from the occultural zine ecosystem. We see this in the 1999 iteration of the site
      pictured in Figure 6. In the banner at the top, the name ‘Cybernetic Culture Research
      Unit’ is written alongside a hand-drawn spiral pattern symbol recalling the secret soci-
      ety imagery commonly used by industrial musicians. Below it is a row of seven catego-
      ries, one of which is notably titled ‘occultures’ and contains descriptions of invented
      ‘subcultures’ the CCRU experimented with in their writing (e.g. AOE, Hyper-C,
      Lemurs). Below that sits a self-authored occult system for summoning demons called
      the Numogram. However, it is on the humble links page that we find the clearest reten-
      tion of 1980s occulture. Already the vernacular metaphors associated with web experi-
      ence conjure images of ludic immersion in information, from the ‘information
      superhighway’ to ‘web surfing’. ‘Liminal’ artefacts like the aforementioned Internet.
      Underground.Guide sought to swerve links directories towards the darker side of occul-
      ture with its pages on UFOs, conspiracy theories, and the occult. The CCRU links page
      amplified these qualities, aligning web surfing with sublime revelations of
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       223     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 5. (a) CCRU institutional website (top), vs (b) CCRU independent website (bottom).
       Both date from 1998 and were retrieved via the Wayback Machine.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      224                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 6. CCRU independent website (1999). Ccru.net. Used with permission of Suzanne
      Livingston.                                            
                                                             
      unconcealment and gnosis. Navigating the web with ccru.net as the starting point, one
      would be guided towards arcane destinations such as: the Aleister Crowley library; the
      Ordo Templi Orientis Phenomenon; the horology index; the I Ching and number theory;
      maps of plate tectonics; a chronology of H.P. Lovecraft’s mythos; artificial intelligence
      and robotics research pages; conspiracism on alien abduction; cyberpunk resources;
      Mesopotamian magic and myth; and more – 70 destinations in fact. As Table 1 and
      Figure 7 show, the blizzard of strange and esoteric references remediate those that could
      be found in the aforementioned 1980s post-counterculture revival zines. And like those
      zines, the experience that is invited oscillates between the epistemological and the aes-
      thetic – between the personal acquisition of ‘knowledge’ and an anti-critical immersion
      in the arcane and otherworldly.                        
        Positioning links pages as immersive media shows the remediation of the aesthetics
      and ludics of zine media for the early web. After Bolter and Grusin (2000), remediation
      is the representation of one medium in another, and a common logic of development in
      the design of media technologies – arguably more so with digital media. However,
      immersion was not only remediated via the re-presentation in another medium of its
      signifying content. Closer examination of the CCRU’s web page shows that it was also
      redeployed using web-idiomatic means. Listed inside the page source code, visible in
      Figure 8, are 53 keywords that the site designer scripted into the page. Surprisingly, the
      keywords give names to the anonymous members and associates of the CCRU, alongside
      musical genres, critics and publications that the group oriented their work towards
      (breakbeat culture, garage, jungle, 2-step, darkside and drum ’n bass; The Wire and i-D
      mag; Simon Reynolds and Kodwo Eshun); essays, concepts, institutions and theorists
      that members of the CCRU might be known for (e.g. ‘Meltdown’ by Nick Land; Steve
      Goodman’s Katasonix label; Y2K; Deleuze, Guattari, DeLanda and Virilio); and more
      overt references to Cold War paranoia and psychedelia (‘drugs’, ‘Nato’, ‘CIA’). Not all
      of these are hidden on the public face of the website (especially Kode9 and Orphan
      Drift), but most are, so it is a strange thing to encounter for a group whose commitment
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       225     
                                                             
       Table 1. ‘Contents’ as it appeared in Rapid Eye 1, 1989.
       CONTENTS                                              
       THE FALL OF ART         THROUGH A SCREEN, DARKLY      
       William S Burroughs     An Audience With Derek Jarman 
       1                       Simon Dwyer                   
                               135                           
       FROM ATAVISM TO ZYKLON B                              
       Genesis P-Orridge & The Temple Of THE GEMSTONE FILE INVESTIGATION
       Psychic Youth                                         
       Simon Dwyer             Who Killed The Kennedys?      
       5                       Nick Toczek                   
                               151                           
       SYBARITE AMONG THE SHADOWS                            
       An invocation Of Aleister Crowley THE SECRET LANGUAGE OF ALCHEMY
       R. C. McNeff            Kenneth Rayner Johnson        
       47                      164                           
       DREAMACHINE             “BRAZIL”                      
       An information Montage  The Last Of England           
       Simon Dwyer             Simon Dwyer                   
       52                      171                           
       BECAUSE AND COSMOS      SEX, CRIME AND THE OCCULT     
       C. John Taylor          Colin Wilson                  
       56                      209                           
       THE VIDEODROME          I AM THE BEAST                
       Situationism & Death TV The Trial Testimony Of        
       Mark Downham            Charles Manson                
       64                      214                           
       WORDS FROM A ROOM       A REVOLUTIONARY SUICIDE       
       An Interview With Hubert Selby jnr. Transcript of Rev. Jim Jones
       Pat Hollis              & The People’s Temple of Christ
       72                      Simon Dwyer                   
                               224                           
       DEAD FINGERS TALK                                     
       An interview With William $ Burroughs TWO DRAGONS PLAYING WITH A PEARL
       V. Vale                 The Ancient Art Of Footbinding
       79                      Nancy MacKenzie               
                               230                           
       THE JOHNSON FAMILY                                    
       William S Burroughs     BODYSHOCKS                    
       84                      An interview With Mr. Sebastian
                               Simon Dwyer                   
       SMILE                   233                           
                                                  (Continued)
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      226                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      Table 1. (Continued)                                   
      CONTENTS                                               
      An Introduction To Neoism                              
      A Rapid Eye Report      THE BLACK BOX                  
      87                      Kathleen McAuliffe             
                              238                            
      TIME MIRRORS                                           
      The Art Of Austin Osman Spare HIS NAME WAS MASTER      
      Genesis P-Orridge       in Memory Of Brion Gysin       
      111                     Genesis POrridge               
                              242                            
      THE UNDYING MONSTER                                    
      Hitler & Nazi UFOs      Epiloque:                      
      lan Blake               A THANKSGIVING PRAYER          
      116                     William S Burroughs            
                              247                            
      I BECOME A MURDERESS                                   
      Kathy Acker                                            
      124                                                    
      TANTRA                                                 
      An introduction                                        
      Sahajanath                                             
      131                                                    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 7. Visualisation of visible links from links page of ccru.net.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       227     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 8. Visualisation of ‘named entities’ hidden in source code of ccru.net.
                                                             
       to collective anonymous authorship has retrospectively provoked such intrigue. In fact,
       the hidden keywords offer exactly what one might expect to find on a conventional links
       page – the personnel, interests, and associates of the group. Indeed, they offer examples
       of aspirational hyperlinking: ‘the anticipatory projection by one party of wished-for rela-
       tions with and valorization by another – relations that are not (yet) reciprocated or actual-
       ized, but in which the potential for an inflationary cycle [of prestige/cultural capital] is
       sought’ (Born and Haworth, 2017: 612)                 
        Why did whichever member designed the website choose to undermine the cool
       secrecy and closure of the CCRU? One interpretation is that the source code contains
       traces of a tactic – now obsolete – to influence search engine results. The functionality
       this relies on was deprecated with the ascent of Google’s PageRank technology after
       about 1998, but in a pre-Google world a site designer could hard-code ‘named entities’
       into a website so that they would be discoverable via search. (Indeed, the presence of
       ‘cybernetic culture research unit’ and ‘ccru’ in the keywords suggests a designer trying
       to anticipate various possible queries.) This means that a search for ‘The Wire’, ‘Simon
       Reynolds’, or ‘2-Step’, for example, could lead a web user to ccru.net, from where
       they would find occultism, conspiracy, number theory, time travel and so on. Thus,
       rather than arriving at The Wire or i-D from ccru.net, the site appears as a detour, or
       better, interrupt, upon searching for these music-related organisations. A naïve visitor
       to the site via this route might be aware that the CCRU had some relationship to
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      228                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      underground and experimental music, but quite what their function or purpose is
      remains unclear.                                       
        The CCRU’s website therefore performs a kind of web-based subcultural infiltration,
      where music and other subcultural interests are switched out for esoterica. To continue
      the analysis begun with Vague, we can say that the naïve visitor to ccru.net is immersed
      – the term conjuring both aesthetic immersion and a kind of radicalisation into the sym-
      bolism and mythos of the CCRU.11                       
      Conclusion: From 1990s Occulture to the 2016 Culture   
      Wars                                                   
                                                             
      When the alt-right emerged into the mainstream during the 2016 US presidential election
      it drew legitimacy from a host of far-right intellectuals, from contemporary neo-reaction-
      aries (NRx) like Curis Yarvin (aka Mencius Moldbug) to more traditional conservatives
      like Jordan Peterson. Somewhere among them were a handful of figures who had made
      their name amid the political upheavals of the late 1980s and early 1990s and were being
      rediscovered: the Russian political analyst and philosopher Aleksandr Gelyevich Dugin
      was one, and Nick Land of the CCRU was another. As has been widely discussed (cf.
      Hawley, 2018; Hermansson et al., 2020; Nagle, 2017), the chief driver of Land’s new
      popularity was ‘The Dark Enlightenment’, a blog series starting in 2013 that critiqued
      liberal democracy’s ‘relentless trend to (intellectual) degeneration’ and toys with neo-
      reactionary themes including ‘race realism’ and ‘human bio diversity’ (Land, 2013). At
      the same time, the fact that Land was listened to at all was a product of the cultural pres-
      tige he had amassed as a philosophy lecturer and guru to a new generation of cultural
      theorists. In article after article across both liberal and right-wing media, Land’s back-
      ground as the expelled Warwick academic-turned-crazed-leader of the CCRU featured
      strongly. Users of political forums like the 4chan/pol (‘politically incorrect’) board in
      turn mythologised the connection, producing esoteric memes that positioned Land as a
      William Blake-like visionary who had glimpsed the neofeudalist future (Dean, 2021) at
      a time when others were talking up the dotcom boom.    
        We see this in a meme posted to the /pol/ board, a political forum on the Reddit plat-
      form (Figure 9). In the image, a pyramid is depicted upon which various online subcul-
      tures are ironically piled up in an ‘interlocking chain of command which constitute(s)
      the power structure of our invisible world government’ – they include the ‘Land-Dugin
      Syncretic Brotherhood’, the ‘CCRU Remnant Enclave (Shanghai)’, and other CCRU
      references (e.g. ‘Architectonic Order of the Eschaton’). The title of the meme is ‘Who
      Runs the World?’, a reference to the varyingly anti-socialist, anti-semitic New World
      Order conspiracy theory which posits a totalitarian political system run by either
      Marxists or Jews. Thus, while it would be poor historicism to suggest, as Noys and oth-
      ers have done, that Land and the CCRU gave rise to extreme right political subcultures
      of the last ten years, we can nevertheless assert that the subcultural esteem Land enjoys
      turned attention backwards, to the strange, remediated new-religion atmosphere that the
      CCRU cultivated following TOPY. Rather than see the path of historical succession
      between the occultural web and the forms of occulture that characterise subcultural
      communication among the far right as a linear and molecular line of ‘influence’, then,
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       229     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 9. [WHO RUNS THE WORLD?] (2020), CCRU meme.    
                                                             
       we might instead characterise it in terms of a structure of protentions and retentions.12
       The traces of 1980s and 1990s occulture in today’s subcultural communication act upon
       the earlier occulture ‘in such a way as to frame it, retroactively, as being a more or less
       straightforward cause of the later’ occulture’s effect (Haworth, 2018: 618; see also
       Born, 2005).                                          
        Yet although figures like Land might like to believe that there is an inevitability
       between their acts in the present and their future repercussions, historical criticism should
       return our attention to the contingent and unsettled nature of events during their own
       present. This article has attempted to foreground this uncertainty by situating 1990s
       occulture within a much wider subcultural network that grew out of punk, and was to an
       extent a reaction to punk’s ideological emphasis on democracy, egalitarianism, and
       grassroots authenticity.13 The industrial dimension of what Savage, Suck and Robertson
       termed ‘new musick’ retained punk’s organisational autonomy, augmenting it with an
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      230                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      elevating turn to the ‘extra-musical’ fields of outsider art and literature. Later, when sub-
      cultural groups in Britain turned their attention to the web, this ‘extra-musical’ culture –
      later termed occulture – informed what they found there.14 One of the continuous logics I
      have tried to emphasise within this turn is an aesthetic of immersion. In Tom Vague’s
      Vague, immersion describes the textual-visual sublime that transforms a text about Charles
      Manson into an aesthetic cipher of psychedelic fascism. In Dwyer’s (1989) Rapid Eye, it
      describes venturing into ‘apolitical and amoral’ thoughtforms that have been ‘hidden
      and ignored, or wilfully marginalised to the extremities of our society’ (p. 3). In Nick
      Land’s CCRU, occulture is remediated and immersion augmented with the disorienting
      tactic of subcultural infiltration.                    
        Immersion should put us in mind of contemporary far-right memes that sit at the inter-
      section between media and politics. Key NRx concepts are the notion of the cathedral
      and of ‘taking the red pill’: the former describing the liberal-progressive-elite whose
      power in terms of its control of the media, higher education, and institutions of power
      serves to suppress independent thought and enforce conformity (Tait, 2019: 194), and the
      latter describing the perspective-shift required to see the world outside of this prism.
      Typically, this entails becoming ‘aware’ of purported Jewish media control (as with the
      racist George Soros conspiracy theories), ‘innate’ biological racial or sexual differences,
      or social problems associated with multiculturalism (Hawley, 2018: 83). Both concepts
      evoke the libertarian ethos of the zines, and particularly Rapid Eye in its desire to cata-
      lyse ‘experimental, undogmatic, intellectual and oddly evolutionary’ thinkers, unbe-
      holden to mainstream taste and opinion. As much as content, however, it is the ideologies
      they carry as media that ensure contact with enlightenment. From underground zines and
      handbooks to the contemporary ‘deep vernacular web’ (de Zeeuw and Tuters, 2020),
      each styles itself as a portal to gnosis. Indeed, it is possible to see media being imbued
      with magic and mysticism, a theme that has animated analyses of the internet both in its
      early stages and in the present (cf. Davis, 1998; Lachman, 2018).
        Immersion, in my understanding, differs from the merely sensory-aesthetic definition
      that dominates in contemporary art scholarship, and that is usually contrasted with the
      mental-conceptual. What is important is not only the implied desire to suspend ‘critical
      thought and differentiation’ (Schrimshaw, 2015: 156), but the imaginaries that inform
      immersion in the unknown. Arun Saldhana’s Psychedelic White compellingly describes
      how ‘white people become white’ through their ‘constant urge’ to engage with spaces
      different to them, whether they be surreal, exotic or otherworldly (Saldanha, 2007: 17).
      Indeed, the desire for transcendence can come at the risk of losing their bearings entirely
      (Saldanha, 2007). After their ‘visionary’ turns, Tom Vague, Simon Dwyer and Nick Land
      used everything from structural anthropology to Victorian-era new religions to ‘make
      strange’ the new media, so that reading a zine or surfing the web could become akin to a
      state of altered consciousness – similar to Aldous Huxley’s experiments with mescaline
      or Timothy Leary’s with LSD. To talk of whiteness in relation to digital media of course
      recalls longer debates on cyberculture, from the ‘white liberal in disguise’ figure of the
      posthuman that Weheliye (2002) describes to the frontier-settler rhetoric that was grafted
      onto early encounters with cyberspace, and that has been analysed by many (cf. Barbrook
      and Cameron, 1995; Streeter, 2011; Turner, 2006). What I have tried to do here, however,
      is to analyse the localised cultural politics of British and European cyberculture, where

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       231     
                                                             
       the digital vanguard was chiefly associated with artists, theorists and creators (Barbrook,
       1998), and where zines and other music media of the previous decade provided the most
       important subcultural coordinates. In these contexts, whiteness manifested in the protec-
       tion from harm it provided to authors and artists to immerse themselves in the anti-
       rational, abject, and censored – including explorations of right-wing esotericism or the
       supernatural thinking that informed the Third Reich.  
        Political theorists like Nancy Love and Ana Teixeira Pinto have highlighted how eas-
       ily art worlds were infiltrated by new right-wing movements like NRx and the alt-right
       after 2016 (Love, 2016; Pinto, 2017, 2020). Love has stressed the need to develop ‘criti-
       cal listening publics’ who are able to ‘crack the not-so-hidden codes of white supremacy’
       that have coursed through alternative musics in the last ten years. To this I would add that
       we also need to develop historical and media literacy. Because although 21st-century
       fascism seemed to emerge in an entirely different way in the previous decade – most
       notably in the strong role played by culture and cultural politics – this is not to say that
       there were not precedents.                            
       Acknowledgements                                      
       The author would like to thank John Eden, Niall Gallen, Michael Haworth, Mimi Haddon, Patrick
       Quick, Ed Spencer and Marie Thompson for comments, suggestions and dialogue that helped to
       improve this article. Funding for this research was provided by the AHRC Leadership Fellowship
       Music and the Internet: Towards a Digital Sociology of Music, grant number AH/S00744X/1.
       ORCID iD                                              
       Christopher Haworth https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0587-1465
                                                             
       Notes                                                 
       1. Context collapse was first described in relation to broadcast media (Meyrowitz, 1985), and
         later extended to digital media (and named) by boyd (2002) in her Master’s thesis. Philips and
         Milner (2017) analyse ambivalence and ironic detachment as products of context collapse.
       2. See for example Siepmann (2019) and Miller (2019). Thompson (2019) has offered a thought-
         ful critique of the industry in op-eds on ‘past transgressions’.
       3. See Vague and Fisher (2016: 78) for a list of zines Vague saw as competing.
       4. All quotes from Vague, issue 1, 1979.              
       5. Vague in the late 1970s was drafting a book on Adam and the Ants, although it failed to con-
         nect with a publisher (Vague and Fisher, 2016: 491).
       6. Cateforis (2011: 26) writes that the ‘more overtly experimental and radical musical decon-
         structions’ of post-punk were initially termed ‘new musick’ by taste-shaping journalists like
         Jon Savage.                                         
       7. Christopher Partridge has become associated with the concept of occulture through a series
         of theoretical texts which draw influence from a range of sources, including the Temple Ov
         Psychick Youth (Partridge 2013a, 2013b, 2013c). However, its origins in Dwyer’s Rapid Eye
         seem little known (cf Partridge, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c).
       8. Siepmann (2019) describes PTV as a ‘front organisation’ for TOPY, which has some fidelity
         to how PTV saw themselves.                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      232                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      9. Mark Fisher was an enthusiastic reader of Vague magazine, writing in his blog that Vague
        ‘understood that the (70s) stand-off between Old Media and fanzines presaged a conflict
        that you are participating in now’ (K-Punk, 2007). Fisher singled out two articles from
        Vague, both by Mark Downham, arguing that they presaged the CCRU: ‘Certainly, there
        would have been no Ccru without Downham’s two treatises, “Videodrome: the Thing in
        Room 101” and “Cyberpunk”, which – years before such connections would be academic-
        rusted into familiarity – patched together Gibson, Debord, Moorcock, Tesla, Baudrillard,
        Apocalypse Now, in a form that accelerated what Ballard had done in The Atrocity
        Exhibition’ (K-Punk, 2007).                          
      10. Robin Mackay writes: ‘let’s get this out of the way: In any normative, clinical, or social sense
        of the word, very simply, Land did “go mad.” Afterwards he did not shrink from meticulously
        documenting this process, as if writing up a failed (?) experiment’ (Mackay, 2012).
      11. In recent years, prominent electronica artists like Oneohtrix Point Never, Chino Amobi, and
        Lee Gamble have explicitly name-checked the CCRU or drawn from their writings in their
        work, while concepts like sonic fiction recirculate around sound art and sound art theory.
      12. This concept is taken from Alfred Gell, who initially drew on Edmund Husserl. Georgina
        Born has adapted the concept for the music disciplines.
      13. It is important to emphasise, however, that the left-leaning attributes that have been associated
        with punk frequently did not bear out in practice. Egalitarianism and especially anti-racism
        often turned out to be retrospective claims made upon the genre from the vantage point of the
        ‘politically correct’ 1980s and 1990s, while punk’s overtly racist aspects were ignored (Sabin,
        1999: 199).                                          
      14. Retrospectively, P-Orridge (2010: 11) claimed that ‘[t]he first generation developers of
        “cyberculture” were certainly aware of – and some of them even active in – TOPY and its
        ideas and ideals’.                                   
      References                                             
      Addicott, Graham (dir.) (1992) Beyond Belief. In: Dispatches series. Broadcast: 19 February,
        Channel 4.                                           
      Barbrook, Richard (1998) The Holy Fools: A Critique of the Avant-Garde in the Age of the Net.
        London: Hypermedia Research Centre, University of Westminster.
      Barbrook, Richard and Cameron, Andy (1995) The Californian ideology. Mute. Available at: https://
        www.metamute.org/editorial/articles/californian-ideology (accessed 26 February 2022).
      Beckett, Andy (2016) Promised You a Miracle: Why 1980–82 Made Modern Britain. London:
        Penguin Books.                                       
      Bland, Benjamin (2018) ‘Don’t do as you’re told, do as you think’: The transgressive zine culture
        of industrial music in the 1970s and 1980s. In: Subcultures Network (eds) Ripped, Torn and
        Cut: Pop, Politics and Punk Fanzines from 1976. Manchester: Manchester University Press,
        pp. 150–169.                                         
      Bolter, Jay David and Grusin, Robert (2000) Remediation: Understanding New Media. Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press.                                       
      Born, Georgina (2005) On musical mediation: Ontology, technology and creativity. Twentieth-
        Century Music 2(1): 7–36. DOI: 10.1017/S147857220500023X.
      Born, Georgina, and Haworth, Christopher (2017) From microsound to vaporwave: Internet-
        mediated musics, online methods, and genre. Music and Letters 98(4): 601–647.
      boyd, danah (2002) Faceted ID/entity: Managing representation in a digital world. Master’s the-
        sis. Massachusettes Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
      Bridle, James (2018) New Dark Age: Technology and the End of the Future. London: Verso Books.

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       233     
                                                             
       Cateforis, Theo (2011) Are We Not New Wave? Modern Pop at the Turn of the 1980s. Ann Arbor,
         MI: University of Michigan Press.                   
       Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong (2021) Discriminating Data: Correlation, Neighborhoods, and the New
         Politics of Recognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
       Cramer, Florian (2016) Alt-right: A lecture. Available at: https://evening-class.org/2016/12/13/
         alt-right-a-lecture-by-florian-cramer (accessed 26 February 2022).
       Davis, Erik (1998) Techgnosis: Myth, Magic and Mystery in the Age of Information. London: The
         Serpent’s Tail.                                     
       Davis, Erik (2014) The counterculture and the occult. In: Partridge, Christopher (ed.) The Occult
         World. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge, pp. 635–645.      
       de Zeeuw, Daniël and Tuters, Marc (2020) Teh internet is serious business: On the deep vernacular
         web and its discontents. Public Culture 16(2): 214–232.
       Dean, Jodi (2021) Neofeudalism: The end of capitalism? In: Lewis, Penny, Holm, Lorens, and
         Santos, Sandra Costa (eds) Architecture and Collective Life. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge,
         pp. 42–54.                                          
       Duncombe, Stephen (1997) Notes from Underground: Zines and the Politics of Alternative
         Culture. London: Verso Books.                       
       Dwyer, Simon (1979) By-pass today. In: Dwyer, Simon (ed.) Rapid Eye Movement, issue 1,
         Winter, self-published.                             
       Dwyer, Simon (1989) Introduction. In: Dwyer, Simon (ed.) Rapid Eye 1, 1st edn. R.E. Publishing
         Ltd.                                                
       Haddon, Mimi (2020) What is Post-punk? Genre and Identity in Avant-garde Popular Music,
         1977–82. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
       Hannah, Matthew (2021) QAnon and the information dark age. First Monday online first. DOI:
         10.5210/fm.v26i2.10868.                             
       Hawley, George (2018) Making Sense of the Alt-Right. New York, NY: Columbia University
         Press.                                              
       Haworth, Christopher (2018) Protentions and retentions of Xenakis and Cage: Nonhuman actors,
         genre and time in microsound. Contemporary Music Review 37(5–6): 606–625. DOI:
         10.1080/07494467.2018.1577639.                      
       Hermansson, Patrik, Lawrence, David, Mulhall, Joe et al. (2020) The International Alt-Right:
         Fascism for the 21st Century? Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
       Holt, Macon (2019) Pop Music and Hip Ennui: A Sonic Fiction of Capitalist Realism. New York,
         NY: Bloomsbury Publishing.                          
       K-Punk (2007) A rupturing of this collective amnesia. Available at: http://k-punk.abstractdynam-
         ics.org/archives/009656.html (accessed 31 January 2022).
       Kirchick, James (2016) Trump’s terrifying online brigades. Available at: https://www.commen-
         tary.org/articles/james-kirchick/trumps-terrifying-online-brigades/ (accessed 26 February
         2022).                                              
       Lachman, Gary (2018) Dark Star Rising: Magick and Power in the Age of Trump. London:
         Penguin Publishing Group.                           
       Land, Nick (2013) The Dark Enlightenment. Available at: http://www.thedarkenlightenment.com/
         the-dark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/ (accessed 31 January 2022).
       Love, Nancy S. (2016) Trendy Fascism: White Power Music and the Future of Democracy. New
         York: SUNY Press.                                   
       Ludovico, Alessandro (1995) Internet.Underground.Guide. Bari, Italy: Minus Habens Records.
       Mackay, Robin (2012) Nick Land: An experiment in inhumanism. Umelec Magazine 16.
       Meyrowitz, Joshua (1985) No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behavior.
         New York, NY: Oxford University Press.              

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      234                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      Miller, Dylan (2019) Why we’re investigating extreme politics in underground music. Quietus.
        Available at: https://thequietus.com/articles/25682-fascism-underground-music-racism-
        industrial-black-metal-noise (accessed 25 August 2022).
      Nagle, Angela (2017) Kill All Normies: Online Culture Wars From 4chan and Tumblr to Trump
        and the Alt-Right. Lanham, MD: John Hunt Publishing. 
      Noys, Benjamin (2014) Malign Velocities: Accelerationism and Capitalism. London: John Hunt
        Publishing                                           
      Noys, Benjamin (2022) Burn out: Reflections on accelerationism. Available at: https://www.
        academia.edu/64818298/Burn_Out_Reflections_on_Accelerationism (accessed 26 February
        2022).                                               
      O’Brien, Luke (2017) Andrew Anglin: The making of an American Nazi. The Atlantic. Available
        at: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/12/the-making-of-an-american-
        nazi/544119/ (accessed 31 January 2022).             
      P-Orridge, Genesis Breyer (2010) THEE PSYCHICK BIBLE: Thee Apocryphal Scriptures ov
        Genesis Breyer P-Orridge and Thee Third Mind ov Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth. Port
        Townsend, WA: Feral House.                           
      Phillips, Whitney and Milner, Ryan M. (2017) The Ambivalent Internet: Mischief, Oddity, and
        Antagonism Online. London: John Wiley & Sons.        
      Pinto, Ana Teixeira (2017) Ironie und alt-right. Springerin 4: 12–14.
      Pinto, Ana Teixeira (2020) Illiberal arts. Pallaten. Available at: https://paletten.net/artiklar/
        illiberal-arts (accessed 26 February 2022).          
      Reynolds, Simon (2009) Rip it Up and Start Again: Postpunk 1978–1984. London: Faber & Faber.
      Sabin, Roger (1999) I won’t let that dago by: Rethinking punk and racism. In: Roger, Sabin (ed.)
        Punk Rock: So What? London: Routledge, pp. 199–218.  
      Saldanha, Arun (2007) Psychedelic White: Goa Trance and the Viscosity of Race. Minneapolis,
        MN: University of Minnesota Press.                   
      Savage, Jon (1983) Introduction. In: Vale, V and Juno, Andrea (eds) Industrial Culture Handbook.
        San Francisco, CA and Eugene, OR: V/Search Publications, pp. 4–5.
      Schrimshaw, Will (2015) Exit immersion. Sound Studies 1(1): 155–170.
      Shirky, Clay (2009) Here Comes Everybody: How Change Happens When People Come Together.
        London: Penguin.                                     
      Siepmann, Dan (2019) Groupthink and other painful reflections on Thee Temple ov Psychick
        Youth. PopMatters, 27 September. Available at: https://www.popmatters.com/genesis-p-
        orridge-groupthink-2640631583.html (accessed 31 January 2022).
      Streeter, Thomas (2011) The Net Effect: Romanticism, Capitalism, and the Internet. New York,
        NY: New York University Press.                       
      Tait, Joshua (2019) Mencius moldbug and neoreaction. In: Sedgwick, Mark (ed.) Key Thinkers of
        the Radical Right. New York, NY: Oxford University Press, pp. 187–203.
      Thompson, Marie (2019) Past transgressions. Keynote given to Punk/Noise, the 6th Punk Scholars
        Network Conference, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 16–17 December.
      Truscott, Lucian K. (1970) Psychedelic fascism. The Georgia Straight, 18 November, pp. 12–13.
      Turner, Fred (2006) From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth
        Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
      Turner, Fred (2019) Machine politics: The rise of the internet and a new age of authoritarianism.
        Harper’s Magazine, January, p. 9.                    
      Tuters, Marc (2021) Belief beyond belief: On fashwave’s esoteric future past. Krisis | Journal for
        Contemporary Philosophy 41(1): 172–178. DOI: 10.21827/krisis.41.1.37162.
      Vague, Tom (1984) Control Data Manual #18/19: Programming Phenomena and Conspiracy
        Theory. London.                                      

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Haworth                                       235     
                                                             
       Vague, Tom and Fisher, Mark (2016) Vague post-punk memories: A lecture by Tom Vague, and
         conversation with Mark Fisher (11/12/14). In: Butt, Gavin, Fisher, Mark and Eshun, Kodwo
         (eds) Post Punk Then and Now. London: Duncan Baird Publishers.
       Vale, V and Juno, Andrea (1984) Industrial Culture Handbook (RE/Search 6-7). San Francisco,
         CA: RE/Search Publications.                         
       Weheliye, Alexander G. (2002) ‘Feenin’: Posthuman voices in contemporary Black popular music.
         Social Text 20(2): 21–47.                           
       [WHO RUNS THE WORLD?] (2020) Available at: https://twitter.com/notjessewalker/sta-
         tus/1328328521211662336 (accessed 26 February 2022).
       Worley, Matthew (2015) Punk, politics and British (fan)zines, 1976–84: ‘While the world was
         dying, did you wonder why?’ History Workshop Journal 79(1): 76–106.
       Wu Ming 1 (2018) Archivio dei tweet di Wu Ming 2009–2019. @wu_ming_foundt, 12 June.
         Available at: https://twitter.com/wu_ming_foundt/status/1006664569920606211 (accessed
         31 January 2022).                                   
       Wu Ming 1 (2021) The Q in Qonspiracy: QAnon and its Surroundings, How Conspiracy Fantasies
         Defend the System. Rome, Italy: Edizione Alegre.    
       Christopher Haworth is Associate Professor in Music at the University of Birmingham. His
       research spans a number of topics in 20th- and 21st-century musics, including electronic and
       experimental musics; British popular music; music and politics; digital media; and music and the
       internet. He is currently completing a historical monograph examining the relationship between
       popular music and radical theory in 1990s Britain, as musicians, political groups, art collectives
       and intellectuals retooled left-aligned theories of political change for the emerging world wide
       web. Between 2019 and 2021 he held an AHRC Early Career Leadership Fellowship under the title
       Music and the Internet: Towards a Digital Sociology of Music. His articles have appeared in such
       journals as Computer Music Journal, Music and Letters, Leonardo Music Journal, and Organised
       Sound, as well as several edited collections. He is also an electronic musician with releases on
       Superpang, Head+Arm, Optophono and others.            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                          Body                     &         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                        Society                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                Editor-in-Chief:
                                             MMiikkee FFeeaatthheerrssttoonnee
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                     Editor: 
                                               Lisa Blackman 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                               Managing Editor:
                                               Tomoko Tamari 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    Body & Society hhaass ffrroomm iittss iinncceeppttiioonn iinn MMaarrcchh 11999955 aass aa ccoommppaanniioonn jjoouurrnnaall ttoo
    Theory, Culture & Society, ppiioonneeeerreedd aanndd sshhaappeedd tthhee fifi eelldd ooff bbooddyy--ssttuuddiieess.. IItt
    has been committed to theoretical openness characterized by the publication of
    a wide range of critical approaches to the body, alongside the encouragement
                                                             
    and development of innovative work that contains a transdisciplinary focus.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    journals.sagepub.com/home/bod                            
                                                             