[PAGE 1]
 1363194                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251363194Theory, Culture & SocietyHoppe
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Ecodependence:   The  Intrinsic        2026, Vol. 43(1) 27 –43
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Connection  between   Living                          
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       and Killing                        sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153136633119944
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Katharina Hoppe                                       
       Goethe-University Frankfurt                           
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article fleshes out the concept of ecodependence, situating it in discussions
       about more-than-human relationality and biopolitics. In ecofeminist discourses,
       ecodependence emphasizes human dependency on natural resources, whereas the
       notion of interdependence focuses on interpersonal relationships. The article critiques
       a distinction between these types of dependency and opposes the related tendency to
       romanticize more-than-human relationality. In contrast, it develops an understanding of
       ecodependence that foregrounds the ambivalent and destructive qualities of relationality.
       Through an analysis of Maria Mies’ ecofeminist framework, the article identifies
       two dimensions of ecodependence: one structural and one ontological. Ecofeminist
       accounts incline toward idealizing dependency in the latter sense. By engaging with the
       works of Donna Haraway and Jacques Derrida, the article proposes a conceptualization
       of ecodependence that acknowledges the destructive character of relationality not
       only structurally but also on an ontological level. It points out the intrinsic connection
       between living and killing, leading to a perspective of affirmative thanatopolitics.
       Keywords                                              
       relationality, ecofeminism, dependency, thanatopolitics, Donna Haraway, Maria Mies
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
                                                             
       Confronted with the current ecological crises, many recent cultural and social theoretical
       contributions emphasize a thinking along the lines of relationality, interwovenness, and
       entanglement. Crucially, these concepts are used to analyze ‘more-than-human’
       (Whatmore, 2002) or interspecies relationality – a relational perspective, it is argued, is
       especially necessary to face the manifold materializations and articulations of ecological
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Katharina Hoppe. Email: k.hoppe@em.uni-frankfurt.de
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      devastation (see e.g. Kirksey and Helmreich, 2010; Lejano, 2019; Tsing, 2012). In par-
      ticular, contributions associated with what has come to be called ‘new materialism’ advo-
      cate a perspective of relational ontology to develop a post-anthropocentric theory that
      takes into account the agency of the non-human world (Barad, 2012; Dolphijn and van
      der Tuin, 2012). Despite the heterogeneity of relational approaches in the Environmental
      Humanities, Ecosocialism, and Science and Technology Studies, there seems to be a
      consensus on the need for ‘relational’ thinking to grasp the complex constitutive condi-
      tions of current crisis dynamics (Escobar et al., 2024; Moore, 2015; Puig de la Bellacasa,
      2017). However, beyond this analytical consensus (that I share), neither the concrete
      characteristics of more-than-human relations nor the normative implications of relation-
      ality are clearly determined or even extensively discussed.
        One promising possibility to qualify more-than-human relationality more precisely is
      offered by the concept of ‘ecodependence’, which originates from ecofeminist discus-
      sions but is barely systematically developed there (Herrero, 2013). With the invocation
      of dependency, this approach calls upon a quality of relationality that is often neglected,
      namely, the substantial character of relations associated with necessity instead of proces-
      suality, vitality, or freedom. In ecofeminist discussions, the concept of ecodependence
      points at the inevitable dependency of human life on natural resources and is distin-
      guished from interdependency, which is understood to be an interpersonal matter
      (Herrero, 2013: 281). Whereas this strict distinction between interpersonal and interspe-
      cies relations reproduces a division between nature and society, this article puts forward
      a more inclusive concept of ecodependence that not only points to the entanglement of
      natural and social aspects of life, but also takes into account the asymmetrical and
      destructive character of dependency relations and does not treat ecological relations as
      homogenous. It will build on the ecofeminist intuition to focus on dependency, because
      this highlights the fundamental necessity of some relations for the reproduction of socie-
      ties and life forms, a necessity which can be seen vividly in more-than-human relations.
      The vocabulary of dependency therefore offers a way to systematically include essential,
      but at the same time (potentially) destructive, qualities of relationality. In particular, a
      further development of the concept of ecodependence opens an important path, because
      more-than-human relationality is neither conceptualized as flat in the sense of being free
      from hierarchies nor normatively charged in the sense of ‘good’ per se. This potential has
      not yet been exhausted in the ecofeminist approach, because here, too, the latter assump-
      tion that the recognition of ecodependence ought to bring about a less appropriative and
      ‘better’ relation to nature plays a crucial role. Until now, the concept of ecodependence
      has therefore been accompanied by a rather affirmative rhetoric that underlines the
      potential of the restoration of a harmonious relation with nature – a motif important to
      many ecofeminist approaches (see Diamond and Orenstein, 1990).1
        Against a ‘political romanticization of relation’ (Hörl, 2017: 7), this article fore-
      grounds the ambivalent nature of ecodependence. Emphasizing the destructive but
      always also nourishing character of relationality avoids a conception of relations of
      dependency as mere (capitalist) domination (Llaguno, 2023). In order to further specify
      the notion of ecodependence as a fruitful approach to more-than-human relationality, the
      article stresses – only at first sight paradoxically – its constitutively destructive character.
      It does so by introducing Donna Haraway’s approach to life as irreversibly linked with

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          29     
                                                             
       practices of killing. This reading of her more-than-human approach emphasizes that
       ecodependence is not conceivable without conceptualizing the ontological quality of
       using each other, of living ‘in and through the use of one another’s bodies’ (Haraway,
       2008: 79). This accentuation of ecodependence has important implications for a more-
       than-human conceptualization of the relation of bio-, thanato-, and necropolitics. While
       necropolitics refers to practices that render living beings merely killable, biopolitics and
       thanatopolitics are closely linked in this perspective, as the politics of life and death
       respectively, since life is considered as inevitable killing. Taking this intrinsic relation
       seriously lies at the very core of thinking with and through ecodependence.
        Following the ecofeminist insight to emphasize dependency as not merely passive or
       ‘bad’, the article sets out from a discussion of the analysis of dependency and independ-
       ency in the work of Maria Mies. In her ecofeminist account, two modes of dependency
       are to be found: one structural and one ontological. I show that the first is a crucial fea-
       ture for theorizing ecodependence, whereas the ontological dimension in Mies positively
       transfigures relationality. In a second step, I draw on the (later) works of Haraway and
       those of Jacques Derrida to elaborate the ontological dimension of ecodependence with-
       out idealizing relationality. Though Haraway herself has been accused of romanticizing
       more-than-human relationality, especially in regard to human-animal relationships
       (Dwyer, 2007), her works are of crucial importance to developing the concept of ecode-
       pendence further. Reading Haraway in dialogue with Derrida reveals a notion of life that
       ties together living and killing, which can inform a robust account of ecodependence.
       Thirdly, I further elaborate the ethical and political implications of the thesis of an irre-
       ducible involvement with killing by discussing Haraway’s approach as a politics of
       affirmative ecodependence that can be understood as an approach to affirmative biopoli-
       tics as thanatopolitics. The article concludes by outlining the potentials of the concept of
       ecodependence as a theoretical and political category.
       Dependency and Independency in Ecofeminism            
       The ecofeminist strand of thought associated with the name Maria Mies – often referred
       to as the ‘Bielefeld School’ and in international debates assigned to so-called ‘social
       ecofeminism’2 – revolves around the criticism of relations of dependency and is hence
       vital for a first approach to the concept of ecodependence. The Bielefeld School devel-
       oped great influence in the late 1970s and 1980s, but in the course of queer-feminist and
       post-structural critique it fell into disregard and then also into oblivion (see Thompson,
       2006). Too difference-feminist, too essentialist, too spiritualist: this is how the post-
       structuralist criticism of ecofeminism in the 1990s may be summarized (see e.g. Haraway,
       1991). By now, however, there is an animated discussion of the renewal of ecofeminism.
       Against the backdrop of climate change and drastic ecological crises, the movement that
       is emerging is almost excessively fast-growing, though important and stimulating, with
       constant revisiting of the tradition (Foster, 2021; Gaard, 2011). For my project of formu-
       lating a more substantial concept of ecodependence, Mies’ account can serve as a starting
       point, because it draws attention to tensions between dependence and independence in
       two important regards: first, in her analysis of the international division of labor, and
       second, in her reflections on the concepts of freedom and emancipation.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      30                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
        In Mies’ analysis of the dynamics of the world market in the course of globalization
      dynamics, the dependency structures of the Global North and the Global South are at the
      core. The thesis of a ‘housewifization of labour’ (Mies, 1986: 74), developed together
      with Claudia von Werlhof and Veronika Bennholdt-Thomsen, is based on a materialist
      analysis of the international division of labor, which focuses particularly on the position
      and function of women in the Global South (see also Mies, 1982). What they describe as
      ‘housewifization’ involves a double analysis of dependency relations. On the one hand,
      the provision of the subsistence base for modernization in countries of the Global South
      was largely performed by females (and other feminized people3), but not recognized as
      such. On the other hand, and beyond that, they have also been actively involved in
      ‘development’ and pushed from the subsistence economy into wage labor. However –
      and this is what ‘housewifization’ describes – the production of consumer goods by
      women was not understood as such, let alone remunerated. On the contrary, the Western
      ‘breadwinner model’, including the ideology of the dependent housewife, was extended
      to the Global South and women’s income was understood as ‘additional income’ to the
      actual income. In this way, not only were reproductive activities rendered invisible, but
      also the contribution of women’s labor in so-called production was relegated to the pri-
      vate and reproductive sphere via housewifization (Mies, 1986: 116–20). Dependence on
      the sphere of subsistence (or reproduction) – i.e. all those practices and processes that
      serve to maintain the basis of life – is obscured by producing something like a ‘house-
      wife’ in the first place: ‘This mystification that women are basically housewives, is not
      an accidental side-effect of the new IDL [international division of labor], but a necessary
      precondition for its smooth functioning: it makes a large part of labor that is exploited
      and super-exploited for the world market invisible’ (Mies, 1986: 120). Exploitation is
      justified by shifting feminized activity into the reproductive sphere, whereby depend-
      ence on these activities is disavowed, precisely because women’s work is denied the
      form of wage labor. With this global and intersectional focus, one can also speak of a
      mechanism of double externalization. The Global North lives at the expense of the
      Global South; and, in the Global South, modernization builds on housewifized labor.
      Following Mies, these invisibilized dependencies on the dynamics of the global capital-
      ist economy can be understood as historically specific parts of ecodependency relations.
      They point to what can be called the structural dimension of ecodependence, which must
      crucially take into account the post- and neocolonial constellation of the present.
        Besides this perspective, Mies offers a second account of dependency and independ-
      ency. This concerns the promise of liberation and the relation of freedom and necessity.
      In the introduction to their co-authored volume Ecofeminism, Vandana Shiva and Mies
      outline a critique of the classical understandings of emancipation. They identify the
      Western-dominant concept of emancipation efforts as the idea ‘that Man’s freedom and
      happiness depend on an ongoing process of emancipation from nature’ (Mies and Shiva,
      1993: 6; emphasis in original). This ideal is based on a profoundly dualistic view of the
      world, in which it is assumed that freedom is realized in a freedom from necessities. In
      such a world view, everything physical and natural is linked to repugnant necessities: ‘As
      well as women, these include nature and other peoples – the colonized and “naturized”
      – “opened up” for free exploitation and subordination, transformed into “others”, the
      “objects”, in this process of European (male) subject’s emancipation from the “realm of

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          31     
                                                             
       necessity”’ (Mies and Shiva, 1993: 7). According to Mies and Shiva, for an ecofeminist
       concept of freedom it is crucial not to deny dependence on these necessities – hence, not
       to deny ecodependence. Rather, freedom must be rethought from the very perspective of
       necessity: ‘Freedom within the realm of necessity can be universalized to all; freedom
       from necessity can be available to only a few’ (Mies and Shiva, 1993: 8; emphasis in
       original; see also Mies, 1986: 40–41). And one should add: The few can only feel free at
       the price of denying their ecodependence. With the emphasis on necessity, a second
       dimension of ecodependence is invoked: the ontological dimension.
        Mies’ ecofeminism therefore theorizes two dimensions of dependency: first and struc-
       turally, the dependence of capitalist reproduction on feminized labor in the Global South,
       which ensures the prosperity and consumption levels of the Global North and the ‘devel-
       opment’ of the countries of the Global South; second and ontologically, it highlights the
       dependency on necessities, especially on nature. Although ecodependence is usually
       only associated with the latter aspect, it is crucial also to grasp the global dimension of
       the reproduction of societies in the Global North. Acknowledging ecodependence must
       involve a theorization of complicity in global capitalist and neocolonial exploitation.
        The ontological dimension of ecodependence relations in Mies, however, is less con-
       vincingly elaborated, which becomes clear with an examination of her positive vision for
       ecofeminist societies. Paradoxically, this vision relies on an ideal of radical independ-
       ence while affirming dependence on ‘nature’. As is well known, this is the ideal of sub-
       sistence economy (Mies, 1993b). With the perspective of subsistence, Mies and her
       colleagues describe forms of economic activity that aim at maintaining the basic neces-
       sities of life and rely on a supply of food that is independent of the world market, that
       involves autonomous control over land and water, and is oriented toward the postulate of
       regionality (Mies, 1993b: 318–22). A certain independence is the core value of this strat-
       egy and refers in particular to an exit of ‘organic communities’ (Shiva, 1993: 106) from
       any linkages with the world market. This radical critique of globalization, however,
       brings with it the danger of romanticizing poverty or ‘indigeneity’, which a timely
       ecofeminist theory must avoid (see Sturgeon, 1997: 113–34). For Mies regards global
       linkages, along with all technologies, as androcentric and dominating (Mies, 1993a).
       Thus, with the idea of subsistent communities, Mies reproduces a fantasy of removal
       from more-than-human relationality (that crucially includes technologies) that is itself
       closely linked to the idea of the sovereign subject of Western modernity. Nature is juxta-
       posed with a genuinely dangerous technology, science, and culture, and an affirmation of
       radical dependence on a pure and genuinely nurturing nature is invoked. Mies and Shiva
       therefore promote a romanticizing affirmation of ontological ecodependence:
        This celebration of our dependence to Mother Earth is quite contrary to the attitude promoted
        by Francis Bacon and his followers, the fathers of modern science and technology. For them
        this dependence was an outrage, a mockery of man’s right to freedom on his own terms and
        therefore had forcefully and violently to be abolished. (Mies and Shiva, 1993: 18)
        The call for affirmation and even celebration of dependence on nature fosters the
       idea of pure, pristine, and peaceful ecodependence that leads to problematic naturaliza-
       tions and homogenizations. In particular, it has encouraged a renewed romanticization
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      32                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      and essentialization of ‘Third World Women’. The idea of learning from and appropriat-
      ing indigenous people’s knowledge, as well as their lived relations to nature, tends to
      naturalize the associated subject positions. A naturalization that renders them passive.
      As Noël Sturgeon puts it: ‘[T]he stance of this form of antiracism ironically still main-
      tains white privilege insofar as it sees women of color, and “nonmodern” women, as
      natural resources for the betterment of white people’ (Sturgeon, 1997: 130).4 It is impor-
      tant to emphasize instead that more-than-human relations and relations of dependency
      in particular are never merely harmonious: they are asymmetrical and heterogeneous,
      they entail destructive potential. For these reasons it is crucial to acknowledge the
      (potentially) destructive character of ecodependence relations not only on the structural
      level, but also on the ontological level (that is historically specific, linked to the
      structural).                                           
      Ecodependence and Practices of Killing                 
      Donna Haraway’s ‘Cyborg Manifesto’ criticized precisely the vision of harmonious rela-
      tions to nature found in Mies’ ecofeminism. In what became a well-known plea, she
      asked for a perspective that is ‘about transgressed boundaries, potent fusions, and dan-
      gerous possibilities’ (Haraway, 1991: 154). It was the normative certainties of the
      ecofeminist ‘goddesses’ that Haraway rejected. To her, technology is not per se andro-
      centric, militaristic, or domineering, and nor is nature harmonious, nurturing, or pure.5
      Addressing the reality of ‘technologically mediated societies’ (p. 154), the ‘Cyborg
      Manifesto’ focused on biotechnological and information technological developments
      and their potentials as well as dangers. Ecological relations were only discussed in pass-
      ing. Towards the end of the essay, Haraway highlights that ‘to recognize oneself as fully
      implicated in the world, frees us of the need to root politics in identification, vanguard
      parties, and mothering’ (Haraway, 1991: 176). Exploring the consequences of this deep
      implication with the world is the essential motif in Haraway’s oeuvre, and especially her
      theory of more-than-human relationality as a process of killing in her later works.
        At least since the publication of her second manifesto – The Companion Species
      Manifesto (Haraway, 2003) – Haraway has no longer theorized relationality as networks
      or as interconnections, but as constitutive entanglement. The concept pointing at this
      shift is the notion of ‘naturecultures’ (Haraway, 2003: 1). With this, she underlines the
      inescapable interwovenness of nature and culture that materializes in a historically spe-
      cific manner as a ‘matrix of contrasts’ (Latimer and Miele, 2013: 11). In Haraway’s later
      work, it is the notion of ‘companion species’ that refers to a theory of naturalcultural
      relationality. It describes the co-constitutive becoming of heterogeneous bodies, organ-
      isms, and entities, which finds expression in various differentiations. Entities and bodies,
      according to this view, emerge in and through relations and do not precede them
      (Haraway, 2003: 6; 2008: 16–17). However, the constitutive relationality across species,
      entities, and technologies is neither thought of as good per se nor as all-encompassing:
      ‘Nothing is connected to everything; everything is connected to something’ (Haraway,
      2016: 31). And it should be added: connections appear in different modes. Dependency
      relations are one of these modes, and these play a crucial role, especially when ecological
      dimensions are considered.                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          33     
                                                             
        According to Haraway, the relations commonly associated with ecological relation-
       ships indicate asymmetrical dependence on one another. They are ‘infectious’, as she
       puts it in Staying with the Trouble: ‘Sheer contagion. Companion species infect each
       other all the time. Bodily ethical and political obligation are infectious, or they should be’
       (Haraway, 2016: 115). The vocabulary of ‘infection’ may be disconcerting, but Haraway
       points to a central insight that one has to take seriously in conceptualizing ecodepend-
       ence: namely, that the normative reference to a re-enchanted relationship to nature and
       our dependence on it is problematic, because it carries with it a purity requirement that
       tends to exclude queer embodiments and hybrid identities. Moreover, it negates the
       destructive dimensions of nature (or better: naturalcultural processes). However, destruc-
       tiveness, infectiousness, and queerness belong to ‘nature’ (Barad, 2012) and it must be
       asked how one can live with and in these ambivalences, at what price, and under what
       circumstances (see also Shotwell, 2016). A price – according to this perspective – always
       has to be paid. This is due to humanity’s deep implication with the world.
        The consequences of this deep ecological and bodily implications are carved out in
       their negativity when Haraway theorizes life as a process of killing (Haraway, 2008;
       Wolfe and Haraway, 2016). As a basic mode of being-in-the-world, life comes into play
       here in ecosystemic embeddedness: human and non-human entities appear more and
       more ‘to be ecosystems’ (Wolfe and Haraway, 2016: 249; emphasis in original). Haraway
       highlights the web of dependence on natural resources and other (more-than-human)
       entities in a radical immanent way; she makes it clear that ‘this question of ecosystem
       assemblages is the name of the game of life on Earth. Period. There is no other game.
       There are no individuals plus environments. There are only webbed ecosystems’ (Wolfe
       and Haraway, 2016: 250). In these webbed ecosystems on all levels, life is understood as
       a differentially articulating and materializing process in which vitality and death, varia-
       tion and continuity are closely intertwined. But Haraway does not merely endorse a theo-
       rization of finitude and death as a part of life; rather, living is understood as a process of
       differential killing. According to her, it is ‘a misstep to pretend to live outside killing’
       (Haraway, 2008: 79).                                  
        Whereas the notion of killing is commonly associated with sovereignty and activity, with
       Haraway one can see that killing in an ontological and post-anthropocentric sense points at
       dependence, necessity, and even a certain passivity. Derrida develops this thought in regard
       to a theory of subjectivity in an interview entitled ‘“Eating Well”, or the Calculation of the
       Subject’ (1995), in which he reflects on the consequences of humanity’s implication with the
       (non-human) world. He sets out with a critical note on Emmanuel Levinas’s humanism,
       arguing that in a purely humanly connoted ‘Thou shalt not kill’ lies the possibility of sacri-
       ficing other carnal beings (Derrida, 1995: 279–80). According to Derrida, this manifests a
       ‘virile and heroic schema’ (p. 281), which culminates in a ‘carno-phallogocentrism”
       (p. 280; emphasis in original), according to which the subject ‘does not want just to master
       and possess nature actively’ (p. 281), but at least in the version of a sovereign subject must
       also ‘be an eater of flesh’ (p. 281). In order to maintain the boundary between human and
       animal, the sovereign subject ‘accepts sacrifice and eats flesh’ (p. 281). Meat eating as a
       specific mode of killing and eating, however, is a particularly problematic case of ‘different
       modes of the conception-appropriation-assimilation of the other’ (p. 281) which is often
       associated with ideals of masculinity via a radical idea of sovereignty (see Adams, 2015).

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      Whereas appropriation and assimilation inevitably take place, accepting the sacrifice of the
      (non-human) other is precisely the dimension of subjectivity and being-in-the-world one
      can criticize against the backdrop of the concept of ecodependence.
        Against the virile and heroic – sovereign – mode of killing, an emphasis on the non-
      heroic dimension of killing allows us to imagine less destructive modes of ‘eating’. One
      way or another, the ontological dimension of ecodependence and this destructive mode
      of being dependent on others is a foundational dimension of subjectivity (which is often
      denied, but has to be shaped, negotiated, and lived with). In the perspective of ‘eating
      well’, Derrida indicates how subjectivity understood in this sense can be constituted in
      ‘better’ or ‘worse’ ways.                              
        The infinitely metonymical question on the subject of ‘one must eat well’ must be nourishing
        not only for me, for a ‘self’, which would thus eat badly; it must be shared, as you might put it,
        and not only in language. ‘One must eat well’ does not mean above all taking in and grasping
        in itself, but learning and giving to eat, learning-to-give-the-other-to-eat. One never eats
        entirely on one’s own: this constitutes the rule underlying the statement, ‘One must eat well’.
        (Derrida, 1995: 282; emphasis in original)6          
        The subject, according to this argument, is inevitably involved in and with what
      Derrida calls eating or what Haraway calls killing. However, differences within these
      killing practices can and have to be made – we are not dealing with some kind of flat
      ontology of killing. Haraway’s proposal in this regard is to abandon the imperative ‘Thou
      shalt not kill’ and to replace it with ‘Thou shalt not make killable’ (see Haraway, 2008:
      80). Kill-ability is produced whenever entire groups of people, species, or other organ-
      isms are rendered deployable. Being rendered killable is a necropolitical process: In the
      production of non-human actors today this is radically evident, for example, in the pro-
      duction of ‘the animal’ not merely symbolically but in brutal materiality. In this regard,
      Haraway speaks of ‘exterminism’ (Haraway, 2008: 78): of a necropolitical killing and
      extermination. Especially in agro-industrial production, killability is the driving force for
      profits. Following a suggestion of her student Eric Stanley, Haraway calls this ‘forced
      life’ (Haraway and Franklin, 2017: 56), to point out the enormous generation of life that
      is only produced to be killed, especially in the ‘animal-industrial-complex’ (Noske,
      1989: 22) for ‘extractive profit’ (Haraway and Franklin, 2017: 57).
        Against this backdrop, there have been discussions of whether this position is an argu-
      ment for strict vegetarianism or veganism (Irni, 2023). And to be sure, there are good
      reasons – from the perspective of ecodependence – to plead for such diets. However,
      Haraway in particular has argued that vegetarianism or veganism should not work as a
      doxa, because this tends to foreclose necessary debate and conflict on how to kill ‘better’
      or how to eat well in always specific cultural and historical circumstances. There is no
      distinction between good and bad killing practices – for example as ‘natural’ versus
      ‘industrial’ practices – that is normatively decided once and for all. Rather, the perspec-
      tive of ecodependence puts forward the necessity of deciding in historically specific
      relations without self-certainty which practices of killing might be appropriate, and
      which practices merely produce beings as killable. This is important in order to avoid
      generalized devaluations of other eating and killing practices, which are often racialized
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          35     
                                                             
       or coded according to class relations – nurturing has quite different expressions and con-
       sequences (see Haraway, 2008: 295–396).7              
        Whereas dogmatic veganism or vegetarianism works from a self-certainty on what is
       nurturing and what is not, crucially for the conceptualization of ecodependence, nurtur-
       ing is neither understood to be completely harmonious nor merely mutually beneficial.
       This perspective shifts away from human exceptionalism and imaginaries of white
       Western self-sufficiency and foregrounds ‘that we are food and that through death we
       nourish others’ (Plumwood, 2012: 91). Taking this shift in the ‘food/death imaginary’
       (p. 91) seriously, ecodependence is not a passive state, but an active involvement.
       However, even in the supposedly sovereign act of killing, the radical dependence of the
       subject is articulated. Living well as an ecodependent subject hence involves learning
       how to give while taking.                             
       Politics of Affirmative Ecodependence                 
       The close relation of living and killing that I have outlined following Haraway and
       Derrida sheds light on a post-anthropocentric understanding of the relations between
       biopolitics, thanatopolitics and necropolitics. Biopolitics has always been associated
       with its supposed opposite, the politics of death. Michel Foucault’s classic definition of
       biopolitics as the politics of disciplining the body and regulating the population, too, puts
       forward a specific relation of life and death (Foucault, 1978: 137–40). Famously,
       Foucault showed that power, at least from the 19th century on, operated as a power over
       life and ‘death is power’s limit, the moment that escapes it; death becomes the most
       secret aspect of existence, the most “private”’ (p. 138). However, the government of life
       implies – at the very least – killing and differential dying. In his analysis of state racism,
       for instance, Foucault asserted a positive relationship between life and death, in which
       the assumption is made that the dying of the one has a positive effect on the life of the
       other, or on (biological) life in general (Foucault, 2003: 255–6). For Foucault, biopolitics
       involves killing, especially by regulating, enhancing and improving life. The exclusions
       and manifest killings evoked by practices of improvement, however, are quite different
       from ‘privatized’ dying. I therefore loosely follow Mbembe (2003) in understanding the
       former set of (racist and colonialist) practices as necropolitics, in contrast to thanatopoli-
       tics. Thanatopolitics, for Foucault, point to human death as something that mostly eludes
       government and is no longer power’s main object. This is a rather limited perspective on
       thanatopolitics – especially when it comes to thinking about more-than-human relations
       – because it largely ignores the constitutive aspects in killing as an inevitable feature of
       life.                                                 
        The conception of living, killing, and eating in Haraway and Derrida places biopoli-
       tics in a post-anthropocentric perspective and makes an ontological claim about the rela-
       tions of living and killing. This accentuates the nexus of thanato- and biopolitics
       differently, in that it analyzes the specific practices of control and regulation of human
       life and its exclusions as necropolitics, but also and beyond that focuses on the concrete
       bio-thanato-political involvement in the web of life of various actors and practices. This
       is why they are also able to give this insight an affirmative and politicizing twist, despite
       the destructive force of relations of ecodependence: By theorizing the inescapable
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      connection between living and killing, and thus the inevitable nexus of affirmative
      biopolitics with – or as – thanatopolitics, their approach attempts to make clear that it is
      precisely in this perspective that a more comprehensive view of a politics of life as a poli-
      tics of affirmative ecodependence becomes possible. Acknowledging the destructiveness
      of life means developing a greater sensitivity to intolerable forms of killing, not trivial-
      izing killing by ontologizing it. Rather than implying a purely harmonious idea of life, it
      also theorizes its destructive – thanatopolitical – force, which must be subject to partial
      affirmations as well.                                  
        This differs significantly from other approaches to affirmative biopolitics. In his elab-
      oration of such a perspective, the Italian philosopher Esposito (2008) introduces a strict
      juxtaposition of thanato- and biopolitics. In the context of his analysis of the paradigm of
      immunization as the prevalent modern form of biopolitics, he states: ‘the category of
      immunization enables us to take another step forward (or, perhaps better, laterally) to the
      bifurcation that runs between the two principal declinations of the biopolitical paradigm:
      one affirmative and productive and the other negative and lethal’ (Esposito, 2008: 46).
      Esposito reconstructs the biopolitics of National Socialism as the extreme point of a
      negative thanatopolitics in which life and community merged: subjects were reduced to
      bodies, individual bodies were absorbed into the body of the ‘people’s community’
      (2008: 110–45). With the end of National Socialism, however, biopolitics and its thanat-
      opolitical form, and with it the immunitarian logic, did not disappear; rather, according
      to Esposito, it is the task of a philosophy after Auschwitz to think about ways of detach-
      ing biopolitics from the logic of immunization. He thus counters the politics of death,
      thanatopolitics, with an affirmative politics of life (2008: 11). Such politics recognize the
      irreducible complexity of life, affirm it and in this way oppose the immunitarian logic of
      the preservation of the isolated self, which he understands as destructive. Esposito’s
      juxtaposition of thanatopolitics and biopolitics is based on the assumption that destruc-
      tive thanatopolitics can be countered by affirmative biopolitics. The perspective of an
      affirmative biopolitics informed by the concept of ecodependence proposed here differs
      from this, since it foregrounds the inevitable character of killing. However, countering
      practices that are immunitarian in the sense that they demand homogeneity and identify-
      ing logics, and recognizing the relative openness and vulnerability of bodies, are shared
      intuitions in the work of Haraway, Derrida, and Esposito, though Esposito’s description
      of thanatopolitics is closer to what I understand as necropolitics: rendering beings and
      groups killable.8                                      
        The point of reference of a politics of life as a politics of affirmative ecodependence
      is life in its ambivalences, its openness and endangerment: life is vulnerable, destructive
      and therefore always endangering itself and others. Accentuated in this way, thanatopoli-
      tics affirms ecodependence as an ontological connection of life to heterogeneous others
      that are not immediately present. The simultaneous consideration of thanato- and biopol-
      itics is hence a precondition for a critique of the excessive killings and production of
      vulnerabilities in the face of ecological crises, especially when the more-than-human is
      considered. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the killing of humans is trivialized as
      an ontological fate or that the killing of animals and of humans are equated with each
      other. The inevitability of killing in the world makes other and further challenges for
      political and ethical action more visible than a Foucauldian perspective on biopolitics,

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          37     
                                                             
       but can – and this is central – make distinctions. Killing itself is ontologized in terms of
       ecodependence in order to criticize practices whereby humans, groups of humans, and
       groups of other living beings or even entire species are rendered killable.
        To make such distinctions, the concept of ecodependence underlines the profoundly
       feminist thesis that the fantasy of being able to step out of killing is just as much a denial
       of physical and social dependencies as the assumption of a realm of freedom beyond that
       of necessity. From an ecofeminist perspective, such denial is understood to cause extreme
       harm:                                                 
        I suggest that what follows from the feminist insight that embraced historically situated,
        mindful bodies as the site of not just first (maternal) birth but also of full life and all its projects,
        failed and achieved, is that human beings must learn to kill responsibly. (Haraway, 2008: 81)
        With this emphasis, Haraway inscribes herself in the feminist interpretation of radical
       relationality and the ecofeminist character of her intervention becomes clear. Just like the
       approach of Mies and Shiva, the conceptualization of ecodependence as destructive rela-
       tionality in which killing takes place tries to think with and through bodily and ecological
       necessities, and even Haraway admits passionately that it is about how to love. Her
       thinking, too, is based on an ‘unembarrassed thinking with and through the love of
       nature’ (Wolfe and Haraway, 2016: 265). As I have shown, however, this version of a
       ‘love of nature’ recognizes the destructive character of life.
        If killing is understood as an ontological constant in ecodependency relations, a nor-
       mative category must be added to further conceptualize the direction of a politics of
       affirmative ecodependence, which is Haraway’s proposal that we refrain from rendering
       beings killable. Such practices of rendering human and non-human beings killable most
       often include a reduction to the reactive. While ‘full’ actors are able to respond to the
       other, killable actors are merely able to react:      
        Every living being except Man can be killed but not murdered. To make Man merely killable is
        the height of moral outrage; indeed, it is the definition of genocide. Reaction is for and toward
        the unfree; response is for and toward the open. Everything but Man lives in the realm of reaction
        and so calculation; so much animal pain, so much human good, add it up, kill so many animals,
        call it sacrifice. Do the same for people, and they lose their humanity. (Haraway, 2008: 78)
        In the denial of the capacity to respond and the categorization of ‘animals’ in the
       realm of reaction, the animal is produced as animal and it is in many cases produced as
       killable (Derrida, 2002: 377; Mehrabi, 2016: 149–61). Wherever entire groups of more-
       than-human entities, entire species, or their livelihoods, are rendered killable (often in
       the name of ‘sacrifice’), thanatopolitics encompassing destructive and nurturing rela-
       tions becomes ‘necropolitics’ (Mbembe, 2003) that instrumentalize human (and more-
       than-human) existence to strategically generate value, to sovereignly appropriate
       bodies, or to destroy them materially. Mechanisms of animalization and dehumaniza-
       tion that reduce living beings (including humans) to mere reaction play a crucial role in
       necropolitical practices, as postcolonial theorists have shown (Deckha, 2012; Said,
       2003: 108–9). In her analysis of totalitarian domination, Hannah Arendt analyzes such
       methods as methods of totalitarianism precisely because these regimes reduce every
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      38                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      person ‘to a never-changing identity of reactions, so that each of these bundles of reac-
      tions can be exchanged at random for any other’ (Arendt, 1958: 438). Pluralism and
      liveliness are eradicated in such practices and, crucially, ecodependence is neglected,
      because the other is not seen as nurturing, or even as ‘useful’ at all.
        Haraway’s late works have been accused of being depoliticizing and of lacking a
      sensitivity for capitalist and technological shifts after the turn of the millennium
      (Gardey, 2014; Hayles, 2006). In particular, the slogan ‘Make kin, not babies’ (Haraway,
      2016: 103) has been subject to heated debate (Battistoni, 2017; Lewis, 2017). Invoking
      the population problem as an issue that suggests countability of isolated subjects and
      entities and moreover recalls a discourse deeply entangled with racist practices of popu-
      lation control does indeed run counter to Haraway’s thinking (Murphy, 2017: 137–41).
      Haraway’s approach to (human) population growth demonstrates that she does not deal
      comprehensively with the implications of ecodependence, because she overemphasizes
      the ontological dimension of more-than-human relationality while largely ignoring the
      specificities of its interwovenness with the structural dimension. While the ontological
      dimension of thanatopolitical being-in-the-world is projected onto ‘too many people’,
      especially in the Global North, the global conditions of exploitation and overproduction
      – the structural dimensions of ecodependence – remain underexplored here.
        In response to the criticism of her slogan, Haraway introduced the distinction between
      ‘The Born Ones’ and ‘The Disappeared’, which theorizes the unequal distribution of life
      chances as well as mere chances of survival in contemporary biocapitalism:
        The Born Ones include the almost unimaginable [. . .] multi-billions of human beings, industrial
        food animals, and companion pets enterprised-up to bloated consumer status. The Disappeared
        include human resisters to criminal nation states, the imprisoned, missing generations of the
        Indigenous and other oppressed people and peoples, unruly women, trafficked child and adult
        sexual and other workers, Black and Brown young people, disposable young people of every
        race or ethnicity, migrants, refugees and displaced people, stateless people, human beings
        subject to ethnic cleansing and genocide, and already 50% of all vertebrate wildlife that were
        living on earth’s lands and oceans less than 50 years ago, plus 76% of fresh water species.
        (Haraway, 2018: 73)                                  
        Belonging to the group of ‘The Disappeared’ means living outside of capitalist, neo-
      colonial utility and hence being exposed to killability, whereas ‘The Born Ones’ fuel
      consumer culture and are heavily involved in (necro- and thanatopolitical) killing prac-
      tices. However, none of these groups are outside killing, and clearly, the involvement of
      ‘The Born Ones’ has to be taken into account rigorously and must be the linchpin of
      criticism. In this regard, it is particularly important to consider the structural facet of
      ecodependence, which I explained at the beginning of this article following Mies and
      other social ecofeminists. Although the ontological dimension of ecodependence
      emphasizes the constitutive and inevitably destructive quality of more-than-human
      relationality, this dimension is not decoupled from the structural dimension. A critical
      analysis of the necropolitical production of killability must be linked back to the mecha-
      nisms of contemporary biocapitalism and neocolonial structures, and take global ine-
      qualities into account.                                
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          39     
                                                             
        A thinking with and through the ‘love of nature’, then, must consider ecodepend-
       ence in its always also destructive ontological and structural dimensions. The invoca-
       tion of a position in which the negative, endangering aspects of life are omitted is
       problematic for a perspective that takes ecodependence seriously. It would install a
       discursive strategy of innocence and unworldliness that obscures accountability and
       consequences. By theorizing the inescapable connection between living and killing,
       the approach of ecodependence attempts to make clear that forms of affirming more-
       than-human involvement are conceivable that do not simply romanticize relationality.
       These take a comprehensive view of ecodependence, including its thanatopolitical
       approach to life: ‘I think we need pro-ongoingness in our mortality, not pro-Life’
       (Wolfe and Haraway, 2016: 236). The concept of ‘ongoingness’ encompasses killing,
       but rejects necropolitics. Affirmative thanatopolitics as a politics of affirmative ecode-
       pendence emphasizes the necessity of spaces for negotiation and for conflicts about
       how and in what form the world – in its destructiveness – should be shaped. The point
       of reference is not the sovereign subject or a freedom from necessity but life in its
       ambivalences, with its openness and endangerment: in its constitutive dependencies on
       human and more-than-human others.                     
       Conclusion: Affirming Ecodependence                   
       Turning to ongoingness by taking account of ecodependence in its destructiveness may
       make a modest impression, not very spectacular, not very radical. In view of contem-
       porary ecological and political disasters, it does not seem like much. However, if the
       ‘love of nature’ is to be a motor of change and criticism and not merely a private pleas-
       ure or a romanticization, the radical character of this modesty must be recognized and
       lived. Affirming ecodependence may open up a path of thinking relationally in a lov-
       ing, but not romanticizing way, because it means affirming and politicizing necessity
       and needs. The feminist insight that dependence on nature, reproduction, bodies, and
       others has to be taken seriously translates into an ecofeminist account that is open
       toward the thanatopolitical dimension of life as a crucial aspect of ecodependence. In
       order to analyze and criticize the mechanisms rendering groups of people, forests,
       animals, species, plants, and landscapes killable, the classical ecofeminist account of
       the international division of labor with all its consequences should not be omitted. The
       structural and ontological aspects of ecodependence have to be analyzed in their co-
       evolving dynamics.                                    
        In regard to the current ecological crises, the distinction between thanato- and nec-
       ropolitical practices is of particular heuristic value. Take the agricultural cultivation of
       soya and the associated deforestation in the Amazon. Careful analysis would not dismiss
       the cultivation of soya on an industrial scale altogether, but focus on differences between
       thanato- and necropolitical practices in this context. Importantly, the production of soya
       as killable has to be examined carefully. Is this put into work to fight world hunger or to
       raise cattle that are in turn born as killable and consume up to 90% of this soya? Killing
       has to be considered judiciously with an eye for necessities and complicities. The con-
       cept of ecodependence as it is outlined here allows for rigorous critical analysis of such
       settings of more-than-human relationality in all its exploitative, destructive, as well as
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      40                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      life-sustaining qualities. It is rigorous in its analytical foresight, and it rigorously con-
      fronts our own involvement with killing. Hence – and again clearly rooted in a feminist
      tradition – it is about complicity that is never completely unavoidable. It asks exactly
      which killings ‘we’ want to afford and how to build ‘better’ constitutively destructive
      ecodependencies that do not collapse into necropolitics. Necessity, according to this
      framework, is not the end or counterpart of politics, but the beginning of shaping more
      livable worlds.                                        
      ORCID iD                                               
      Katharina Hoppe https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0303-8624  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. This affirmative gesture towards (ecological) relations is also present in discussions about
        more-than-human relationality in new materialism, in particular. Here, too, positions can be
        found that recognize a positive ethical value in relationality as such or see positive ethical and
        political effects in the mere recognition of interdependence (see e.g. Bennett, 2010: 121–2;
        Benson, 2019: 252–3; Braidotti, 2013: 49–50). The emphasis on relationality is one important
        point of connection that shows the affinity between ecofeminisms and new materialisms. For
        a more extensive discussion of the two theoretical strands, see Casselot (2016) and Stevens
        et al. (2017: 10–13).                                
      2. In the literature on ecofeminism, a distinction between social (sometimes ‘socialist’) and
        cultural ecofeminism has become common to distinguish spiritualist and difference-feminist
        oriented approaches such as those of Susan Griffin and Starhawk from socialist and structur-
        ally-oriented approaches such as those of Carolyn Merchant and Val Plumwood. For an exten-
        sive discussion of the history of the field and the many strands of ecofeminism which cannot
        all be easily assigned to one camp see, for example, Carlassare (2000) and Gaard (2011).
      3. It is crucial to note that Mies and the Bielefeld School belong to a strand of thought that is
        closer to difference-feminism, which is why they were criticized by queer-feminist interven-
        tions of the 1990s. However, the notion of housewifization is not limited to the analysis of
        women’s labor, but can also be extended to the labor of many non-binary and Trans positions,
        as well as to people of other genders.               
      4. Which is not to say that critical ecofeminism should not be informed by indigenous studies.
        Quite the reverse: it is important to refer to these works without appropriating or romanticiz-
        ing them from the outside, and crucial in indigenous studies on ecological issues (see e.g. De
        la Cadena, 2015; Sempértegui, 2021).                 
      5. Mies in turn vehemently criticized the cyborg as a feminist figure as a postmodern gimmick
        encouraging the fragmentation and commodification of the female body (see Mies and Shiva,
        1995: 32). Early on, Alaimo (1994) advocated a critical alliance between ecofeminism and
        cyborg feminism – the concept of ecodependence put forward here also seeks to tie both
        strands of discourse together.                       
      6. In French, the double – ontological and ethical – dimension of this thought comes to the fore
        more clearly, as the translator notes: ‘The phrase in play here, “Il faut bien manger” [. . .],
        can be read in at least two ways: “one must eat well” or “everyone has to eat”’ (Derrida, 1995:
        475).                                                
      7. For a critical perspective on Haraway in this regard see Adams (2006), and for a discussion of
        Derrida’s position concerning the question of meat eating see Oliver (2019).

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          41     
                                                             
       8. Giorgio Agamben understands biopolitics even more radically as thanatopolitics and, as
         is well known, deals primarily with the extermination policies of National Socialism (see
         Agamben, 1998). Following my argument made here, these practices, too, would belong to
         the realm of necropolitics. Haraway and Derrida’s perspective of differential killing by no
         means excludes these necropolitical processes as Agamben describes them. Rather, the aim is
         to adopt a perspective that is capable of distinguishing between different practices of killing
         and then criticizing them appropriately. The scope of such a critique is expanded to include
         non-human entities and environments.                
       References                                            
       Adams, Carol J. (2006) An animal manifesto: Gender, identity, and vegan-feminism in the twenty-
         first century. Interviewed by Tom Tyler. Parallax 12(1): 120–128.
       Adams, Carol J. (2015) The Sexual Politics of Meat: A Feminist-Vegetarian Critical Theory. New
         York, NY, London: Bloomsbury.                       
       Agamben, Giorgio (1998) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Stanford, CA: Stanford
         University Press.                                   
       Alaimo, Stacy (1994) Cyborg and ecofeminist interventions: Challenges for an environmental
         feminism. Feminist Studies 20(1): 133–152.          
       Arendt, Hannah (1958) The Origins of Totalitarianism. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace &
         Company.                                            
       Barad, Karen (2012) Nature’s queer performativity. Kvinder, Køn & Forskning/Women, Gender
         and Research 1–2: 25–53.                            
       Battistoni, Alyssa (2017) Monstrous, duplicated, potent. On Donna Haraway. n+1, 28. Available
         at: https://www.nplusonemag.com/issue-28/reviews/monstrous-duplicated-potent/ (accessed
         21 July 2025).                                      
       Bennett, Jane (2010) Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University
         Press.                                              
       Benson, Melinda H. (2019) New materialism: An ontology for the Anthropocene. Natural
         Resources Journal 59(2): 251–280.                   
       Braidotti, Rosi (2013) The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Carlassare, Elizabeth (2000) Socialist and cultural ecofeminism: Allies in resistance. Ethics and
         the Environment 5(1): 89–106.                       
       Casselot, Marie-Anne (2016) Ecofeminist echoes in new materialism? PhaenEx. Journal of
         Existential and Phenomenological Theory and Critique 11(1): 73–96.
       Deckha, Maneesha (2012) Toward a postcolonial, posthumanist feminist theory: Centralizing race
         and culture in feminist work on nonhuman animals. Hypatia 27(3): 527–545.
       De la Cadena, Marisol (2015) Earth Beings: Ecologies of Practice across Andean Worlds. Durham,
         NC: Duke University Press.                          
       Derrida, Jacques (1995) ‘Eating well’, or the calculation of the subject. In: Derrida, Jacques (ed.)
         Points . . . Interviews, 1974–1994. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, pp. 255–287.
       Derrida, Jacques (2002) The animal that therefore I am (more to follow). Critical Inquiry 28(2):
         369–418.                                            
       Diamond, Irene and Orenstein, Gloria Feman (eds) (1990) Reweaving the World: The Emergence
         of Ecofeminism. San Francisco, CA: Sierra Club Books.
       Dolphijn, Rick and van der Tuin, Iris (eds) (2012) New Materialism: Interviews & Cartographies.
         Ann Arbor, MI: Open Humanities Press.               
       Dwyer, June (2007) A non-companion species manifesto: Humans, wild animals, and ‘the pain of
         anthropomorphism’. South Atlantic Review 72(3): 73–89.

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      42                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(1)
                                                             
      Escobar, Arturo, Osterweil, Michal and Sharma, Kriti (2024) Relationality: An Emergent Politics
        of Life beyond the Human. London: Bloomsbury.        
      Esposito, Roberto (2008) Bios: Biopolitics and Philosophy. Minneapolis, MN: University of
        Minnesota Press.                                     
      Foster, Emma (2021) Ecofeminism revisited: Critical insights on contemporary environmental
        governance. Feminist Theory 22(2): 190–205.          
      Foucault, Michel (1978) The History of Sexuality. Volume I: An Introduction. New York, NY:
        Pantheon Books.                                      
      Foucault, Michel (2003) Society Must Be Defended: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1975–
        1976. New York, NY: Picador.                         
      Gaard, Greta (2011) Ecofeminism revisited: Rejecting essentialism and re-placing species in a
        material feminist environmentalism. Feminist Formations 23(2): 26–53.
      Gardey, Delphie (2014) The reading of an œuvre: Donna Haraway: the poetics and politics of life.
        Feministische Studien 14(1): 86–100.                 
      Haraway, Donna (1991) A cyborg manifesto: Science, technology, and socialist-feminism in the
        late twentieth century. In: Haraway, Donna, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention
        of Nature: London: Free Association Books, pp. 149–181.
      Haraway, Donna (2003) The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant
        Otherness. Chicago, IL: Prickly Paradigm Press.      
      Haraway, Donna (2008) When Species Meet. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
      Haraway, Donna (2016) Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Durham, NC:
        Duke University Press.                               
      Haraway, Donna (2018) Making kin in the Chthulucene: Reproducing multispecies justice. In:
        Clarke, Adele and Haraway, Donna (eds) Making Kin Not Population. Chicago, IL: Prickly
        Paradigm Press, pp. 67–99.                           
      Haraway, Donna and Franklin, Sarah (2017) Staying with the manifesto: An interview with Donna
        Haraway. Theory, Culture & Society 34(4): 49–63.     
      Hayles, N. Katherine (2006) Unfinished work: From cyborg to cognisphere. Theory, Culture &
        Society 23(7–8): 159–166.                            
      Herrero, Yayo (2013) Miradas ecofeministas para transitar a un mundo justo y sostenible. Revista
        de Economía Crítica 16: 278–307.                     
      Hörl, Erich (2017) Introduction to general ecology. The ecologization of thinking. In: Hörl,
        Erich and Burton, James (eds) General Ecology: The New Ecological Paradigm: London:
        Bloomsbury, pp. 1–73.                                
      Irni, Kuura (2023) Fostering feminist politics of veganism: On ‘the political’ in Donna Haraway’s
        approach to food, eating and animals. Redescriptions. Political Thought, Conceptual History
        and Feminist Theory 26(19): 4–20.                    
      Kirksey, Eben and Helmreich, Stefan (2010) The emergence of multispecies ethnography. Cultural
        Anthropology 25(4): 545–576.                         
      Latimer, Joanna and Miele, Mara (2013) Naturecultures? Science, affect and the non-human.
        Theory, Culture & Society 30(7–8): 5–31.             
      Lejano, Raul P. (2019) Relationality and social–ecological systems: Going beyond or behind sus-
        tainability and resilience. Sustainability 11(10): 2760.
      Lewis, Sophie (2017) Chthulu plays no role for me. Viewpoint Magazine. Available at: https://
        viewpointmag.com/2017/05/08/cthulhu-plays-no-role-for-me/ (accessed 21 July 2025).
      Llaguno, Tatiana (2023) Alienated dependence: The unfreedom of our social relations. Journal of
        Social Philosophy 56: 185–201.                       
      Mbembe, Achille (2003) Necropolitics. Public Culture 15(1): 11–40.
      Mehrabi, Tara (2016) Making Death Matter: A Feminist Technoscience Study of Alzheimer’s
        Sciences in the Laboratory. Linköping: TEMA (Department of Thematic Studies).

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hoppe                                          43     
                                                             
       Mies, Maria (1982) The Lace Makers of Narsapur: Indian Housewives Produce for the World
         Market. London: Zed Books.                          
       Mies, Maria (1986) Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women in the International
         Division of Labor. London: Zed Books.               
       Mies, Maria (1993a) New reproductive technologies: Sexist and racist implications. In: Mies,
         Maria and Shiva, Vandana (eds) Ecofeminism. London: Zed Books, pp. 174–197.
       Mies, Maria (1993b) The need for a new vision: The subsistence perspective. In: Mies, Maria, and
         Shiva, Vandana (eds) Ecofeminism. London: Zed Books, pp. 297–324.
       Mies, Maria and Shiva, Vandana (1993) Introduction: Why we wrote this book together. In: Mies,
         Maria, and Shiva, Vandana (eds) Ecofeminism: London: Zed Books, pp. 1–21.
       Mies, Maria and Shiva, Vandana (1995) Einleitung: Warum wir dieses Buch zusammen geschrie-
         ben haben. In: Mies, Maria and Shiva, Vandana (eds) Ökofeminismus: Beiträge zur Praxis
         und Theorie. Zürich: Rotpunkt Verlag, pp. 7–35.     
       Moore, Jason W. (2015) Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital.
         London: Verso.                                      
       Murphy, Michelle (2017) The Economization of Life. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
       Noske, Barbara (1989) Humans and Other Animals: Beyond the Boundaries of Anthropology.
         London: Pluto Press.                                
       Oliver, Kelly (2019) Derrida and eating. In: Kaplan, David M. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Food and
         Agricultural Ethics. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 574–579.
       Plumwood, Val (2012) The Eye of the Crocodile. Canberra: ANU E Press.
       Puig de la Bellacasa, María (2017) Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human
         Worlds. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
       Said, Edward (2003) Orientalism. London: Penguin Books.
       Sempértegui, Andrea (2021) Indigenous women’s activism, ecofeminism, and extractivism: Partial
         connections in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Politics and Gender 17(1): 197–224.
       Shiva, Vandana (1993) Homeless in the ‘global village’. In: Mies, Maria and Shiva, Vandana (eds)
         Ecofeminism: London: Zed Books, pp. 98–107.         
       Shotwell, Alexis (2016) Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times. Minneapolis,
         MN: University of Minnesota Press.                  
       Stevens, Lara, Tait, Peta and Varney, Denise (2017) Introduction: ‘Street fighters and phi-
         losophers’: Traversing ecofeminisms. In: Stevens, Lara, Tait, Peta and Varney, Denise
         (eds) Feminist Ecologies: Changing Environments in the Anthropocene: Cham: Springer
         International Publishing, pp. 1–22.                 
       Sturgeon, Noël (1997) Ecofeminist Natures: Race, Gender, Feminist Theory, and Political Action.
         New York, NY: Routledge.                            
       Thompson, Charis (2006) Back to nature? Resurrecting ecofeminism after poststructuralist and
         third-wave feminisms. Isis 97(3): 505–512.          
       Tsing, Anna L. (2012) Unruly edges: Mushrooms as companion species. Environmental
         Humanities 1: 141–154.                              
       Whatmore, Sarah (2002) Hybrid Geographies: Natures, Cultures, Spaces. London: Sage.
       Wolfe, Cary and Haraway, Donna (2016) Companions in conversation. In: Wolfe, Cary and
         Haraway, Donna (eds) Manifestly Haraway. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press,
         pp. 199–296.                                        
       Katharina Hoppe is a research associate at the Institute of Sociology at Goethe-University
       Frankfurt, Germany. Her research and teaching focuses on sociological, feminist and critical theo-
       ries as well as the sociology of science and nature relations.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    Learning            Resources                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
     A complete  suite. For supercharging research.          
                                                             
     Supporting  student success. And  creating impact.      
                                                             
                                                             
     At Sage, we offer seamless experiences across all of our digital
     resources, from books, cases, videos, and data to full online courses.
     We pride ourselves on the quality of our content – in fact, we
                                                             
     commission most of it ourselves. It’s driven by our deep understanding
     of the theory and practice of learning, and by our vast experience
     publishing teaching and research materials. For anyone involved in
     research, we have the only tool dedicated to social science research
     skills training. And for anyone studying business, we publish a resource
     collection with a contemporary global perspective.      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
     Powered by Data Planet                                  
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                              sagelearningresources.com      
                                                             