[PAGE 1]
 1303689                                                     
 research-article2024 TCS0010.1177/02632764241303689Theory, Culture & SocietyKapoor
                                                             
                                                             
       Global Public Life                                    
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Intersectionality, Decoloniality,    2025, Vol. 42(7-8) 141 –161
                                              © The Author(s) 2024
       Indigenous Localism:  A                               
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Critique                           sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462442143130033668899
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Ilan Kapoor                                           
       York University, Toronto                              
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article claims that, despite their critical-political stances, three current and
       influential theoretical frameworks – intersectionality, decoloniality, and ‘Indigenous
       localism’ – unconsciously accept global capitalism. The article focuses on the work
       of Crenshaw, Mignolo, Coulthard, and Tuck and Yang, respectively, to argue that, by
       ascribing to identity politics (intersectionality), a pluriversal politics of authenticity
       (decoloniality), and a decentralized ‘incommensurability’ (Indigenous localism), each
       engages in the culturalization and/or localization of politics – one that disavows the
       dimension of political economy, and because of that, one that conforms well with, and
       poses no threat to, capitalist liberal globalization. The article concludes by reflecting on
       what such disavowal says about our late capitalist times, as well as the potentialities and
       perils of a contemporary subaltern anti-capitalist politics.
       Keywords                                              
       decoloniality, ideology critique, indigeneity, intersectionality, the political, political
       economy, psychoanalysis                               
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
                                                             
       In his well-known debate with Butler et al. (2000: 566), Slavoj Žižek contends that
       ‘Capital is Real’. The Real in Lacanian psychoanalysis stands for the unconscious, the
       gap or cut that both enables and disables the material and the symbolic, so Žižek’s import
       is that, in our present global conjuncture, the capitalist system is unconsciously assumed.
       He declares that:                                     
        in so far as we conceive of the politico-ideological resignification in the terms of the struggle
        for hegemony, today’s Real which sets a limit to resignification is Capital: the smooth
        functioning of Capital is that which remains the same, that which ‘always returns to its place’,
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Ilan Kapoor. Email: ikapoor@yorku.ca
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      142                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
        in the unconstrained struggle for hegemony. Is this not demonstrated by the fact that Butler, as
        well as Laclau, in their criticism of the old ‘essentialist’ Marxism, none the less silently accept
        a set of premisses: they never question the fundamentals of the capitalist market economy and
        the liberal-democratic political regime; they never envisage the possibility of a completely
        different economico-political regime . . . all the changes they propose are changes within this
        economico-political regime. (Butler et al., 2000: 223)
      So naturalized is capitalism, according to Žižek, that it not only serves as an ‘objective’
      standard against which we – late capitalist subjects/critics – live our lives, but it also ends
      up framing our political resistance. Anti-systemic critique thereby emerges from within
      capitalist dynamics themselves.                        
        In this article, I would like to make a similar claim with regard to three current criti-
      cal-theoretical frameworks: intersectionality, decoloniality, and what I term ‘Indigenous
      localism’. All three have become notably popular in academic circles, dominating criti-
      cal social theory, especially during the last decade or so. Intersectionality stresses the
      complexity of identity to bring out the multiple axes of social marginalization under
      multicultural democracies. It is the oldest of the three frameworks, first elaborated in the
      late 1980s by Crenshaw (1989) but now undergoing a renaissance after the publication
      of Crenshaw’s (2014) Essential Writings and Collins and Bilge’s (2016) Intersectionality.1
      Decoloniality denounces the coloniality and Eurocentrism of global modernity, arguing
      instead for a pluriversality of cosmologies. Currently, this line of thinking is all the rage
      at Western universities, sparking initiatives to ‘decolonize’ classrooms, knowledge sys-
      tems, and pedagogies (Pimblott, 2020; Smith, 2012). For its part, Indigenous localism is
      a critique of settler colonialism, advocating alternatively for decentralized Indigenous
      sovereignty. This, too, is a prominent critique on campuses today, particularly in North
      America and Australia, resulting in conspicuous calls for the indigenization of education
      and the enforcement of Indigenous treaty rights, including the ‘acknowledgement’ and
      repatriation of the Indigenous lands on which some campuses are located (McCoy et al.,
      2017; Turnbull and Pickering, 2010).                   
        But despite the critical stances of these three frameworks – anti-racist, feminist, anti-
      colonial, and Indigenous – I will point out their unconscious acceptance of global capi-
      talism. By ascribing to identity politics (intersectionality), a pluriversal politics of
      authenticity (decoloniality), and a decentralized ‘incommensurability’ (Indigenous local-
      ism), each engages in the culturalization and/or localization of politics – one that disa-
      vows the dimension of political economy, and because of that, one that conforms well
      with, and poses no threat to, capitalist liberal globalization.
        I will focus principally, although not exclusively, on the work of Kimberlé Crenshaw
      and Walter Mignolo, both of whom are widely considered chief proponents, respec-
      tively, of intersectionality and decoloniality. Indigeneity is a much broader and more
      heterogeneous field, particularly considering the huge plurality of global indigenisms. I
      have chosen, therefore, to home in on two recent and particularly influential texts in this
      field, Glen Coulthard’s (2014) Red Skin, White Masks and Tuck and Yang’s (2012)
      ‘Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor’, both of which, I argue, end up advocating for a
      localist Indigenous politics that secretly fetishizes the very economico-political regime
      they criticize. Hence my grouping of them under the banner of ‘Indigenous localism’.
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        143     
                                                             
       The two texts are therefore not necessarily representative of indigeneity as a global
       field, but only of those strands within it that ascribe to a localist politics.
        My overall political aim is not to dismiss the claims of these critical bodies of work
       – I share their anti-racist, feminist, anti-colonial, and pro-Indigenous politics – but to
       demonstrate the importance of facing up to the antagonisms of capitalist political
       economy in our times: without meaningfully attending to questions of socioeconomic
       exploitation and inequality, all the changes they propose, to rehearse Žižek’s argu-
       ment, are changes that prop up rather than dismantle the capitalist economico-politi-
       cal regime. I conclude by reflecting on what such disavowal says about our late
       capitalist times, as well as the potentialities and perils of a contemporary subaltern
       anti-capitalist politics.                             
       Intersectionality                                     
                                                             
       Multiple Oppressions                                  
       Crenshaw’s concept of intersectionality is aimed at grasping the complexity of identity
       to account for social oppression and privilege. In her trailblazing piece, ‘Demarginalizing
       the Intersection of Race and Sex’ (Crenshaw, 1989), she analyzes three legal rulings in
       the US which dismissed cases brought by African-American women alleging workplace
       discrimination (including at General Motors) on the grounds of both gender and race.
       She is critical of the ‘additive model’ on which such a dismissal is based, because it treats
       identity as discrete and isolated, conceptualizing gender and race as ‘pure’ and ‘mutually
       exclusive categories of experience and analysis’ (Crenshaw, 1989: 139). The conse-
       quence, according to her, is that antidiscrimination laws exclude multiply oppressed peo-
       ple – in this case, women disadvantaged on the basis of both gender and race. The narrow
       scope of such laws results in Black women being recognized either as women or Black,
       but not both simultaneously. In the first case, the identity of Black women is equated
       with that of (privileged) white women – whom the law takes as the norm – eliding the
       former’s experience of racial discrimination; and in the latter case, the identity of Black
       women is equated with that of Black men – whom the law takes as the norm – eliding the
       former’s experience of gender discrimination. The laws are thus blind to the particularity
       of the multilayered discrimination encountered by Black women, which is distinct from
       what either white women or Black men experience, even if Black women may share
       experiences of discrimination with both.              
        Famously deploying the metaphor of a two-way crossroads, one road standing for
       ‘race’, the other ‘gender’, Crenshaw makes the case for intersectionality by claiming that
       accidents that happen at the crossroads cannot be attributed to either one separately but
       both together (p. 149). Social justice thereby means taking into account manifold pro-
       cesses of marginalization, so that, for example, misogyny may privilege white gay men
       over racialized female and LGBTQ+ people in a given workplace, yet homophobia may
       still disadvantage said men relative to straight men in the same workplace (Evans and
       Lépinard, 2019). Intersectionality thus highlights how identity cannot be understood in
       an additive way. As Collins and Bilge (2016) put it, ‘When it comes to social inequality,
       people’s lives and the organization of power in a given society are better understood as
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      144                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      being shaped not by a single axis of social division . . . but by many axes that work
      together and influence each other’ (p. 2).             
                                                             
      The Surrender to Capitalist Multiculturalism           
      While undoubtedly significant in highlighting identity-based oppression under capitalist
      liberal democracies, the problem with intersectionality is precisely its assumption of the
      capitalist liberal democratic framework for analyzing and countering oppression.
      Crenshaw (1989) reproaches the narrowness and ‘uncritical and disturbing acceptance of
      dominant ways of thinking about discrimination’ (p. 150), but elides the insufficient
      breadth of her own position. In this sense, intersectionality only goes part of the way in
      recognizing multiple and overlapping modes of ‘thinking about identity and its relation-
      ship to power’ (p. 18): along the way, it gets locked into liberal-multiculturalist rights
      discourse, failing to question the very category of identity on offer by the System.2 The
      result is that it allows the System to determine what political options are available to it.
        Indeed, identity politics is integral to capitalist liberal multiculturalism, allowing state
      and market to recognize and protect minority group rights. Yet the latter development is
      revealing of the very political limitations of liberal rights discourse (Jameson, 1991;
      McGowan, 2020): while certainly empowering for social groups and focusing public
      attention on a host of issues created, ignored, or suppressed by liberal democracies, the
      problem is that identity/multicultural politics, far from effecting structural changes, has
      been easily mainstreamed – incorporated into the System. The reason is that cultural
      recognition poses little threat to capitalist multiculturalism: the state’s granting of minor-
      ity rights or the business sector’s recognition of group identities requires no meaningful
      systemic changes. On the contrary, the corporate sector, for example, has been only too
      happy to capitalize on ‘cultural capitalism’, niche marketing products to multicultural
      groups, while ‘proudly’ sponsoring such events as Earth Day, Women’s Marches, Black
      History Month, or Gay Pride. The political weakness of identity politics lies, in other
      words, in its tendency to too narrowly focus on identity issues, at the expense of broader
      and more collective material and socioeconomic rights (land rights, the protection of the
      environmental commons, socioeconomic equality, etc.; more on that below).
        Implied in this ‘culturalization of politics’ is the positivization of identity – essential-
      izing it, fixing its parameters – which is what allows the liberal state and corporate capi-
      talism to anesthetize it, domesticate it, commoditize it. And such positivization is
      reflected in intersectionality, revealing of its compliance with a liberal multicultural
      framework. Accordingly, Carastathis (2008: 25–6, 2016: 125–62) analyzes Crenshaw’s
      subjects as always already ‘having’ identities, on the basis of which their marginalization
      occurs: ‘political marginalization follows . . . the formation of the identity of the hyper-
      oppressed subject, who by virtue of her identity is politically marginalized. Intersectional
      subjects come, so to speak, already formed to the space of political contestation’.3 It is
      not the negative space of the intersection that is upheld, since negativity would be diffi-
      cult to fix, accommodate, or commodify, thus threatening the mobility of global capital.
      What is countenanced by intersectionality instead is the positivization of identity, some-
      thing the System welcomes for its stability, recognizability, and commodifiability. It is
      because the hyphenated subject (e.g. female-Black-disabled-queer) is identifiable,
      because multiple subject-positions can be integrated into the System – indeed can help

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        145     
                                                             
       advance the System since the more subject-positions, the more opportunities for com-
       modification and product differentiation – that intersectionality’s critical stance ulti-
       mately conforms with, and helps reproduce, capitalist multicultural politics.
        Further evidence of such conformism is that intersectional analysis is now integral to
       mainstream – including private sector – equity, diversity, and inclusion (EDI) strategies
       (Ahmed, 2007; Mounk, 2023), most often aimed at enhancing organizational perfor-
       mance. Intersectional EDI training helps employees acknowledge their implicit biases
       against the diversity of identities and human experiences so as to improve hiring prac-
       tices and ensure inclusive workplaces. It tends to be agent-focused, only addressing
       questions of oppression (misogyny, homophobia, racism, ableism, etc.) at the level of the
       individual employee or to the extent that they help advance organizational inclusion,
       effectiveness, and profit-making, as opposed to tackling broader social systems of
       oppression. In fact, the more intersectional and multidimensional the organization’s EDI
       strategy, the more it can promote its brand as equitable and diverse (even if it does not
       necessarily live up to such a claim). This is not to suggest that intersectionality is inher-
       ently corporate, but to point out that its tendency to culturalize and positivize identity,
       despite – and because – of its multi-dimensionality, leaves it too easily open to domesti-
       cation, commodification, corporate branding.          
        Psychoanalysis adds another significant dimension here: the reason why intersec-
       tional identity politics appeals in today’s multicultural world is because of the subject’s
       enjoyment (jouissance) of it – enjoyment in Lacanese denoting the excessive pleasure
       derived from something to the point of irrationality (Lacan, 1998: 183–4).4 Accordingly,
       under a multicultural regime, the subject is seduced by the prospect of social and politi-
       cal recognition and recovery (Thakur, 2020: xx–xxi; Žižek, 2006: 309). Intersectionality’s
       libidinal reward can be seen in a range of current socio-political occurrences: the (liberal)
       benevolence of granting rights and rescuing and rehabilitating oppressed voices; the cor-
       responding thrill of being recognized by claiming identity or minority rights; the self-
       righteousness of asserting one’s oppression and ‘victimhood’; and/or the narcissism of
       acknowledging one’s personal guilt and complicity in social injustices. Of particular note
       is ‘privilege theory’ (Applebaum, 2011; Kimmel and Ferber, 2016), which, while bring-
       ing attention to privileged subject positions and complicity in homophobia, patriarchy, or
       racism, can sometimes create an atmosphere of surveillance and disciplining (‘privilege
       checking’) of both self and other. As Zalloua (2020) notes, there is ‘a kind of illicit satis-
       faction – an unconscious enjoyment – not only in exposing the blind spots [and] . . .
       rhetorical disciplining of others, but in your own self-discipline, in your perceived suf-
       fering. . . . At its base level, privilege theory provides you with the fantasy of interven-
       tion and action; it offers you criticism (attention to subjective violence) without critique
       (occluding objective [i.e. systemic] violence)’ (pp. 36, 18). So invested can people
       become in identity (their own and that of others) that they can get bogged down in battles
       over recognition and self-policing.                   
        The libidinal complement to intersectional identity politics thus reinforces the cultur-
       alization of liberal democratic politics. Real social problems (discrimination, marginali-
       zation, racialization, inequality) are pressingly raised, but only superficially or partially
       acted upon. People enjoy and publicize their critical self-awareness, their empathy with
       the oppressed, and their seemingly progressive and humanitarian politics, but without

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      146                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      taking any meaningful action (confronting the systemic barriers to inequalities, or
      demanding collective and material rights, not simply individual civil and cultural rights).
      We feel good about naming our complicity in global inequality, or we get off on surveil-
      ling others’ lack of ‘political correctness’, but this only ends up reinforcing the particu-
      larity, fragmentation, and depoliticization that capitalist liberal democracies count on.
        But intersectionality’s most significant blind spot is its disavowal of political econ-
      omy. Class as socioeconomic category, in particular, is all but absent in Crenshaw’s
      piece, as evidenced for example by the following statement: ‘theories and strategies pur-
      porting to reflect the Black community’s needs must include an analysis of sexism and
      patriarchy. Similarly, feminism must include an analysis of race if it hopes to express the
      aspirations of non-white women’ (Crenshaw, 1989: 166). Consistent with her identity-
      focused claims, in the few spots that Crenshaw broaches class, she does so as part of a
      series of categories – e.g. ‘race, sex, class, sexual preference, age, and/or physical ability’
      (p. 151),5 thereby taking class as an identity (i.e. the identity of ‘privileged white women’
      or ‘working-class Black women’). But equating class with identity culturalizes the term,
      reducing the problem of social oppression once again to questions of diversity and inclu-
      sion. It flattens socioeconomic inequalities, implying the latter are simply a problem of
      difference, so that, for instance, by recognizing and including working-class Black
      women in the social field, they will somehow be on a level playing field with ‘privileged
      white women’.                                          
        Marx’s (1847) insistence on class as a socioeconomic category (p. 195) is meant pre-
      cisely to bring out the socioeconomic inequality on which the capitalist system is
      founded, and the resulting sociopolitical antagonism that follows (as intimated by his
      notion of ‘class struggle’). By focusing on social diversity and identity recognition to
      give voice to the marginalized, intersectionality ends up smoothing over this key antago-
      nism, thereby covering over capitalism’s ‘dirty secret’ (exploitation, domination, socio-
      material hierarchies). As Foley (2019) points out, the ‘fact that the black women in
      question [in Crenshaw’s article] are workers who earn at best modest wages, but make
      the bosses of GM very rich, is simply taken as a given . . . [Crenshaw’s] model for analy-
      sis and compensation [is] confined to the limits of the law’ (p. 11). Choosing cultural
      explanations to oppression over material ones, investing in liberal civil rights discourse
      to address socioeconomic wrongs, ends up treating the symptom as the cause. Foley
      perspicaciously points out in this regard that it is not ‘race’ that causes racism, or ‘gen-
      der’ that results in misogyny (p. 11); rather, race and gender are categories of social dif-
      ferentiation invented at the dawn of capitalism to justify the exploitation and domination
      of labour (Lugones, 2016; Quijano, 2000; Robinson, 2019). By omitting this historical-
      structuralist dimension, intersectionality misses the material roots of marginalization and
      oppression (Aguilar, 2015; Foley, 2019). In this regard, what Crenshaw’s crossroads
      metaphor ignores is that the velocity/power of some vehicles (i.e. representing class,
      revealingly absent in her example) is more impactful than others. So without attending to
      socioeconomic inequalities, it is difficult to see how patriarchy and racism (or indeed
      homophobia and ableism) can be meaningfully abated, as indeed they haven’t despite
      (and dare I say it, because of) decades of liberal rights recognition around the world
      (Fraser and Honneth, 2003).6                           
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        147     
                                                             
        But then why such disavowal by intersectionality? As implied by Žižek’s earlier quoted
       intervention, it is to be understood as an ideological feature of our times – the bracketing
       of Capital so as to present capitalist multicultural democracies in a favourable light; and
       so that, despite critique, they are naturalized. Žižek (1989) zeroes in on a particular type
       of disavowal – ‘fetishistic disavowal’ (pp. 18, 32–3), wherein we know all too well about
       the problems of global capitalism (production of socioeconomic and spatial inequalities;
       dependence on new forms of slavery; environmental crisis; exploitation and domination
       of racialized, gendered, and migrant people), all the more so in our current ‘information
       economy’, but still invest in the System. This is to say that, despite critique, we secretly
       love capitalism (hence our unconscious fetishization of it), accepting it as the de facto
       politico-economic horizon, much like intersectionality does when it assumes (capitalist
       multicultural) identity politics, thereby assuming away class as a socioeconomic category.
       Here, ideology takes critique ‘into account in advance’ (Žižek, 1989: 27) to provide the
       intersectional subject with a degree of distance. And such distance is not an ideological
       flaw, but a strength in better helping to psychically invest the subject in the System.
        Note that what is being disavowed in such an ideological maneuver7 is, as underlined
       above, the ugly underside of capitalist political economy – inequality, exploitation, etc.
       – that is, the socioeconomic antagonisms that the System would rather not too readily
       have exposed. Redistributing wealth, seriously addressing material inequality and social
       hierarchy, is not an option under capitalism since the System is founded precisely on
       wealth concentration, inequality, exploitation, domination (of people and nature). Hence
       the compelling psychoanalytic insight that the disavowal of political economy is sympto-
       matic of how crucial political economy is to the System. This is why a materialist critique
       of the System is the one the latter fears the most because threatening to both the powers-
       that-be and capital accumulation. And this is also why intersectionality’s retreat from
       class toward culturalist explanations of oppression, its championing of diversity and
       inclusion, its neglect of capitalism’s systemic violence, ends up producing a toothless
       feminism/anti-racism, a ‘capitalism with a human face’ perhaps, but one that ultimately
       leaves the System intact.                             
       Decoloniality                                         
       The Coloniality of Power and Pluriversality           
       Decoloniality tends to approach contemporary politics in stark, black-and-white terms,
       broadly rejecting Western modernity, while valorizing decolonial (and especially Global
       South and subaltern) ways of knowing and living. For Mignolo (2007), on whose work I
       focus here, the geo-political location of knowledge and identity matters (p. 469). This is
       because, for him, European modernity has been coercively imposed on the rest of the
       world as universal panacea (Mignolo, 2018: xii). His goal, instead, is to retrieve a ‘pluriv-
       erse’ of decolonized subaltern epistemologies.        
        Central to Mignolo’s viewpoint is Quijano’s (2000, 2007) notion of ‘coloniality of
       power’ – the systematic application of material, epistemic, and aesthetic resources needed
       to ensure empire. Here coloniality is seen as continuing in the former colonies even after
       their political independence, manifesting as the pervasiveness of Eurocentric knowledge
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      148                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      systems and continuing patterns of racial oppression and socioeconomic exploitation. For
      Mignolo, coloniality cannot be separated from Western modernity; both are co-constitu-
      tive: ‘“modernity” is a complex narrative . . . that builds Western civilization by celebrat-
      ing its achievements while hiding at the same time its darker side, “coloniality”. Coloniality
      . . . is constitutive of modernity – there is no modernity without coloniality’ (Mignolo,
      2011: 2–3). The (post)colonial subject is accordingly only peripherally incorporated into
      the Euro-North American metropole, with subaltern epistemologies either wiped out or
      classified as ‘underdeveloped’ in relation to European norms (Mignolo, 2012: xxv).
        In response, Mignolo (2011) advocates for ‘epistemic disobedience and delinking
      from the colonial matrix in order to open up decolonial options’ (pp. 9, 54). His aim is
      decolonizing the colonial subject’s imaginary by fracturing ‘the hegemony of knowledge
      and understanding that have been ruled, since the fifteenth century . . . [by] the theologi-
      cal and ego-logical politics of knowledge and understanding’ (Mignolo, 2010: 313). For
      him, this epistemological shift will help transform both the terms and the content of the
      coloniality/modernity matrix. Mignolo draws on Anzaldúa (1987) to argue for ‘border
      thinking’, through which suppressed subaltern cosmologies are transformed into
      resources for constructing ‘alternatives to modernity’ (Mignolo, 2010: 320, 2011: xxviii,
      2012: 12, 157).                                        
        It is such epistemological delinking that, according to Mignolo, will help produce
      decolonial ‘pluriversality’. Here he borrows the well-known Zapatista motto of creating
      ‘“another world” in which many worlds will co-exist’ to make the case for a planet of
      multiple co-existing ontologies and temporalities. The idea is to enable, not a single
      global future dictated by the West, but plural ones in which decoloniality would be one
      option among others, including what he names as ‘Rewesternization’ (through which
      Western powers attempt to maintain their declining global political-economic power)
      and ‘Dewesternization’ (through which ‘emerging powers’ challenge Western hegem-
      ony) (Mignolo, 2011: 27–35).                           
      A Politics of Authenticity and Disavowal               
      There is much to learn from decoloniality – from its multi-dimensional analysis of colo-
      niality, to its critique of Western modernity and its prescriptions for decolonizing the
      colonial matrix. But Mignolo’s analysis inclines toward romanticizing decolonial spaces.
      He has almost nothing critical to say about the subaltern/Global South; it is as though
      they are somehow immune to contradiction, failure, or disagreement (Kapoor and
      Zalloua, 2022: 96–9).                                  
        This is evident in Mignolo’s reliance on simplified and intransigent binaries such as
      when he pits Western ‘imperial’ universalism against decolonial pluriversality, which for
      him is invariably ‘convivial, dialogical, or plurilogical . . . decolonial and communal
      personalities are driven by the search for love, conviviality, and harmony’ (Mignolo,
      2018: xii, xiv; see also Mignolo, 2011: 313). It is also evident in the work of the
      Modernity/Coloniality/Decoloniality research programme, a collective Latin America-
      focused research project of which both Mignolo and Arturo Escobar are part. The project
      prioritizes ‘non-Eurocentric’ forms of living/knowledge rooted in such communities as
      the Zapatistas in Mexico, Indigenous groups in Ecuador and Bolivia, and Afro-Latinx
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        149     
                                                             
       movements in Colombia (Asher, 2013: 838; see also Escobar, 2020: 84–96, 120–35;
       Mignolo, 2011: 11, 213–51). Yet when Mignolo applauds, for example, the Zapatistas for
       their participatory politics and collective consensus-making, he appears to ignore that
       consensus-based politics can coerce single decisions on communities, often suppressing
       subaltern voices (Kapoor, 2008: 107–8, 2020: 147–69; see Rancière, 1999). When
       Mignolo praises Indigenous communities, he ignores, for instance, the cooptation of
       Indigenous leaders by the Ecuadorean state, the Morales regime’s backtracking on com-
       mitments to Indigenous self-determination to appease capitalist extraction, ideological
       divisions between and among Indigenous groups across North, South, and Central
       America, or the anti-Muslim politics of sections of adivasi (Aboriginal) communities in
       India in collaboration with right-wing Hindu supremacists: ‘What is absent in Mignolo’s
       representations of the subaltern are the warnings by the likes of Freire and Fanon about
       the possibility of internalized subaltern oppression, racism, and co-optation (which is
       ironic, given that Fanon is one of Mignolo’s key decolonial exemplars)’ (Kapoor and
       Zalloua, 2022: 96; see also Baviskar, 2007; Merino, 2016).
        The extent of such an indiscriminate politics of authenticity/romanticization is to be
       gleaned in Mignolo’s recent endorsement of a book from a right-wing Hindu author
       (Deepak, 2021) who deploys decolonial arguments to make the case for a return to a
       Hindu (Brahmanical) epistemology. After a public outcry, Mignolo eventually withdrew
       his endorsement,8 but his willingness to uncritically embrace a Hindu nationalist politics
       just because it is disparaging of Western epistemology and aims at retrieving an
       ‘Indigenous’ Hindu cosmology is revealing of the decolonial tendency to embrace puta-
       tively ‘authentic’ Global South spaces even if they are elitist or oppressive.
        What is conspicuously missing in Mignolo’s decolonial position is the dimension of
       the Real, the imminent blockage that prevents any discursive formation – whether capi-
       talist, post-capitalist, or pluriversal – from actualizing its identity. As Crenshaw does
       with intersectional identity, Mignolo appears to so revel in the jouissance of the subal-
       tern/Global South space that he is blind to – disavows – social contradictions. Hence his
       resort to an authentic pluriversality devoid of imperfections: a space where, as Michaelsen
       and Shershow (2007) underline in their analysis of his work (p. 53), there is de facto
       consensus and agreement, indeed not even the need to criticize, debate, or deliberate.
       This appears as the textbook definition of ideology – the erasure of the political, the
       covering over of social antagonism (Žižek, 1989: 25). 
        The accompanying proclivity is that the production of an authentic Global South sub-
       altern space ends up militating against the putative political subject of decoloniality – the
       subaltern. In this regard, echoing Spivak (1988), Asher (2013: 838–9) suggests that
       Mignolo and his decoloniality peers are ‘turning to subaltern knowledge to fulfill [their]
       desire to create a just world for humans and non-humans’. Decolonial jouissance of the
       pluriverse induces the absence of critical self-reflexivity on the part of the decolonial
       analyst, with the latter portraying himself as transparent relay able to accurately capture
       the subaltern voice. The search for a subaltern pluriverse thus becomes a self-fulfilling
       prophecy: you project a pluriversal platform on the subaltern and then rejoice in miracu-
       lously finding it! But in this mêlée, the subaltern is not heard (which is why my above
       critique of Zapatista participatory politics says less about the Zapatistas than Mignolo’s
       construction of them).                                

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      150                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
        Mignolo’s Manichaean argumentation also tends to be broadly dismissive of Western
      thought, accusing it of complicity in the colonial matrix of power, thus appealing for it to
      be superseded (Mignolo, 2002: 80, 2010: 346). He seems to conflate hegemonic European
      (colonial) thought with European thought writ large. In so doing, he fails to acknowledge
      the many European intellectual counter-discourses to colonial rationality or binary think-
      ing (anti-imperialism, non-dualism, communitarianism, etc.) with which, for all intents
      and purposes, much of decolonial thought is allied. He fails as well to account for his
      own debt to so-called Eurocentrism, disavowing that his intellectual background, as well
      as the very language (English) and critical tools he deploys (e.g. geopolitics, difference,
      epistemology, gnoseology, aesthesis), are unavoidably Eurocentric (Kapoor and Zalloua,
      2022: 99–100). Worse still, his policing of the boundaries of what is ‘Western’/‘non-
      Western’ ends up eliding the centuries-old cultural and economic exchange between
      Europe and its putative others (Africa, the Arab world, Indigenous America, the Indian
      subcontinent, etc.); or indeed the substantial history of subaltern resistance – in Europe’s
      colonies, and in Europe itself – that is integral to the emergence of such notions as
      ‘equality’, ‘freedom’, and ‘social justice’ (see, for example, Anghie, 2005; Buck-Morss,
      2009; Cusicanqui, 2012).                               
        Thus, Mignolo’s decolonial disavowal of the unconscious/Real is not only deeply
      ideological for romanticizing subaltern pluriversality, but also deeply depoliticizing.
      Rather than seeing internal (community or social movement) differences and contradic-
      tions as weaknesses/traumas to be suppressed or avoided in order to produce a perfect
      subaltern ‘hero’, why not try to face them head-on to invent new and creative (although
      never harmonious) subaltern political spaces? Rather than understanding colonial vio-
      lence and dispossession as a reason to nostalgically manufacture past or present glory or
      wallow in victimhood and resentment (against European thinkers), why not struggle to
      become proficient with, and use, European discourses of emancipation and freedom to
      fight for subaltern equality and social justice everywhere? The Western colonial legacy
      is indeed imperialist domination and plunder, but it is also, as Žižek (2009) underlines,
      ‘that of the self-critical examination of the violence and exploitation the West itself
      brought to the Third World . . . the West supplied the very standards by which it (and its
      critics) measures its own criminal past’ (p. 115). The antagonisms of European hegem-
      ony, in this sense, can be viewed as powerful subaltern political resources. And such is
      the case not only for the subaltern from the Global South, but also for the subaltern from
      the Global North: their common predicaments could be the occasion to find cause
      together in shared trauma (Kapoor, 2020: xv, 66; Kapoor and Zalloua, 2022: 20). This is
      something that Mignolo’s demonization of the West precludes, failing as it does to dis-
      tinguish hegemonic from subaltern (counter-) discourses, whether in the West or other-
      wise, thereby further depoliticizing the subaltern.    
        Finally, there is the issue of the exclusion of the state and political economy in
      Mignolo’s gloss. In regard to the state, Mignolo stands firmly against it, predictably see-
      ing it as the political expression of (Western) coloniality. For him, pluriversal spaces
      would ‘exist independently of the state and corporations’ by delinking ‘from state forms
      of governance, from the economy of accumulation’ (Mignolo, 2018: xii, xiv). Thus, ‘the
      future would be composed of “communal nodes” around the planet cooperating rather
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        151     
                                                             
       than competing with each other . . . [through] the entanglement of several cosmologies
       connected today in power differential’ (Mignolo, 2011: 283, 2018: x).
        But Mignolo’s position appears politically naive. Without some form of coordinating
       authority like a state, it remains unclear how the security and well-being of ‘communal
       nodes’ would be realized; what would ensure cooperation, rather than conflict, among
       and between nodes, especially given ‘power differential’; and how these nodes would be
       able to thwart the continuing incursion of global capital, or threats from both the Western
       and ‘de-Westernized’ powers envisaged by Mignolo. It seems, in fact, that his pluriversal
       politics unconsciously requires a national, regional, and/or transnational state to ensure
       the coexistence of ‘many worlds’. He appears to count on such things as peace enforce-
       ment, cooperation, provision of universal education and health care, regulation of multi-
       nationals, campaigns against global viral infections, and so forth, for his communal
       nodes to thrive.                                      
        As to political economy, it is all but absent in Mignolo’s political viewpoint, given
       his pluriversal privileging of epistemological, at the expense of material, decoloniza-
       tion. He does sketchily mention imperial resource extraction in his critique of colonial-
       ity, but says almost nothing about the material dimensions of pluriversality. This is
       because (expectedly) he assesses Marxist political economy as integral to a ‘Eurocentered
       critique’ (Mignolo, 2011: xi, xviii), glossing over the many variants of Third World
       Marxisms (whether Nepalese, Cuban, Chinese, South African, Peruvian, Indian, etc.,
       many of which have been actualized as political projects with varying degrees of suc-
       cess/failure, including democratic communism in Kerala and Bengal, for example).
       Mignolo (2010) looks instead to ‘delinking from capitalism’ epistemologically (p. 339),
       as though decolonized knowledge production will undo not just neoliberal ideology but
       the structures of global capitalism. The overwhelming evidence to date points to just the
       opposite: as mentioned earlier, the success of corporate capitalism lies in part in its co-
       optation of the epistemological-cultural claims of social movements – because not only
       do they not pose a threat to accumulation, but they can also be commodified to advance
       accumulation. This is all the more the case with a decolonial politics of authenticity
       which, like intersectionality, fixes and essentializes subaltern culture/identity, thereby
       enabling its commoditization.                         
        Consequently, given the disavowal of any state-like authority or meaningful material-
       ist analysis or strategy, Mignolo’s decolonial pluriversality yields to little more than what
       decolonial Indigenous scholar Cusicanqui (2012) sees as ‘multiculturalism’ (p. 104).
       Decoloniality may well mount a critique of the coloniality of power, but in Mignolo’s
       hands, just as in Crenshaw’s, such critique nonetheless ends up facilitating, not challeng-
       ing, global capitalism. Localism/particularism nicely suits capitalism as much as coloni-
       ality, since it can be readily accommodated if not commodified. So as with Crenshaw, my
       claim is that Mignolo’s disavowal of state/political economy and his accompanying
       advocacy of the local amounts to an unconscious acceptance of capitalist multicultural-
       ism. We are thus left with another case of ‘fetishistic disavowal’ – a secret love for the
       System in spite of an outwardly biting critique of it. The global capitalist order sets (and
       is allowed to set) the boundary for decolonial counterhegemonic critique.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      152                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      Indigenous Localism                                    
      Anti-Capitalist ‘Self-Conscious Traditionalism’?       
                                                             
      At first glance, my psychoanalytic-Marxist position aligns well politically with Dene
      scholar Glen Coulthard’s (2014) argument in Red Skin, White Masks: he carries out a
      blistering Fanonian critique of the Canadian settler-colonial state, focusing on the contra-
      diction between recognition of Indigenous rights and the simultaneous dispossession of
      Indigenous lands and neglect of Indigenous nations’ socioeconomic and cultural rights.
      Not only does the Canadian state attempt to ‘reconcile’ Indigenous claims by simply
      ‘including’ Indigenous identity in the country’s multicultural landscape, but at the same
      time, as Coulthard demonstrates, it maintains in novel ways the long tradition of colonial-
      capitalist domination of Indigenous communities through their socioeconomic and cul-
      tural marginalization (e.g. residential schools, land grabs, deforestation, and resource
      extraction on Indigenous territories). Liberal rights recognition, then, is a way of repro-
      ducing colonial oppression, wherein the terms of recognition, instead of being dialogical,
      are determined by the dominant partner – the capitalist settler-colonial state (Coulthard,
      2014: 17–18, 31–42). Coulthard explicates, accordingly, how what we have been calling
      the ‘culturalization of politics’ plays out with Indigenous nations in Canada, with the
      deployment of identity recognition as a way of covering over domination and exploitation
      in the realm of political and cultural economy. He concludes that for ‘Indigenous nations
      to live, capitalism must die. And for capitalism to die, we must actively participate in the
      construction of Indigenous alternatives to it’ (p. 173).
        But it is precisely à propos his gloss on Indigenous alternatives that problems
      arise. There appears to be a contradiction between his desire for a ‘non-dialectical’
      Indigenous resurgence and one that is ‘self-consciously traditional’. Indeed, drawing
      on the work of Taiaiake Alfred (2005, 2009) and Leanne Simpson (2011, 2014), he
      insists that such a resurgence ‘does not require us to dialectically transcend
      Indigenous practices of the past’ (Coulthard, 2014: 154). Instead, he endorses a ‘self-
      conscious traditionalism’ (p. 155) aimed at rehabilitating and strengthening
      Indigenous cultural identity to opt out of the coercive and assimilative liberal poli-
      tics of recognition. The idea is to draw on Indigenous traditions to ‘re-creat[e] the
      cultural and political flourishment of the past’ (Simpson, quoted in Coulthard, 2014:
      156). Coulthard sees such cultural reclamation as critical and socially progressive,
      aiming for example at a pro-feminist and LGBTQ+ politics (pp. 157–8).
        Yet, in the absence of a dialectic, such progressivism appears as wishful thinking. For
      Hegel, who Coulthard (2014) specifically references in this regard (pp. 26–9), the dialec-
      tic is decidedly the site of self-division and alienation, moving the subject toward self-
      consciousness and critique (Hegel, 1977: 138, 2010: 360; McGowan, 2019: 12). Here, it
      is subjectivity’s immanent (not transcendent) self-contradiction that both structures iden-
      tity and propels it forward (i.e. outside itself, toward that which it is not). Without a
      dialectic, then, it is difficult to understand how, in Coulthard’s vision, Indigenous tradi-
      tionalism would become ‘self-conscious’. What would enable or mediate such autocri-
      tique? Why would traditionalism be socially critical and progressive rather than
      regressive? Missing in ‘Indigenous traditionalism’, in other words, is the domain of the
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        153     
                                                             
       political (Rancière, 1999), which is what responds to ever-present social antagonisms
       (the Real), thus making for a landscape of contestation and debate. And the lack of the
       political in Coulthard’s case means that Indigenous traditionalism, despite attempts to
       recover and renew it, still nostalgically aspires to a ‘flourishment of the past’. Not so
       different from Crenshaw’s intersectional identity or Mignolo’s decolonial politics of
       authenticity, Indigenous culture thereby becomes a positive and depoliticized cultural
       resource/archive, once again risking fetishization, essentialization, commodification.
       Coulthard gestures toward the Real of culture by favouring Indigenous social progressiv-
       ism in the midst of traditionalism, but ends up settling for what Zalloua (2023) aptly calls
       a ‘self-enclosed decolonial revival project’ (p. 186, n173). His critical cultural politics is
       undercut by his jouissance of ‘traditional’ identity. 
        This is all the more perplexing given that his exemplar, Fanon (1963), is notably criti-
       cal of a politics of identity and authenticity, seeing the négritude movement, for example,
       as a ‘blind alley’ – a narrow ‘racism of defense’ that is nothing but the ‘logical antithesis’
       of White European prejudice against Blacks (pp. 163–4, 214, 212). Despite the tendency
       toward cultural recovery after the trauma of colonial rule (racism, exploitation, dispos-
       session, domination), Fanon writes that ‘the past can in no way be my guide in the actual
       state of things’ (Fanon, 1967: 199–200), advocating instead for a dialectical and politi-
       cized vision of culture – a ‘fighting’ culture, one that ‘takes its place at the very heart of
       the struggle for freedom’ (Fanon, 1963: 222, 233). It is such political dynamism that
       secures against the positivization of culture or the enjoyment of tradition, impeding
       either from encrusting borders or identity.           
        Coulthard’s advocacy of Indigenous localism provides further evidence of this depo-
       liticized – albeit outwardly critical – stance. As just mentioned, he is rightly condemna-
       tory of the settler state for its continuing coloniality of power. But like Mignolo, he
       appears thereby to do away with it, advocating instead for Indigenous self-determina-
       tion ‘by cultivating self-sufficiency through . . . localized and sustainable production’
       (p. 172). And just like Mignolo, he provides no clues as to how such a decentralized
       politics would fend off ‘settler colonial capitalism’ in the absence of a state-like coordi-
       nating authority. Coulthard’s self-critical Indigenous traditionalism appears, once again,
       to unconsciously require a (local, national, and/or transnational) state to resist both
       coloniality and the reach of corporate capitalism. In this regard, Zalloua (2023) asks:
       ‘can Indigenous nations truly live if capitalism thrives everywhere else in the world
       (assuming one can even manage to kill it at home via sustainable and self-sufficient
       Indigenous economies)? Doesn’t global capitalism benefit if Indigenous communities
       keep their anti-capitalism, their nonexploitative alternatives, local?’ (p. 31). An anti-
       capitalist ‘self-conscious traditionalism’ thus appears a contradiction in terms, since the
       demise of global capitalism would require a transnational, and precisely not a decentral-
       ized/localist, riposte.                               
        It is important to note that those who advocate for localism and decentralization –
       Mignolo and Coulthard in this case (and Tuck and Yang as outlined below) – may well
       be right to argue that the socialization (and greening) of the economy cannot be coerced
       by the (capitalist-settler-colonial) state; it must happen through grassroots subaltern
       organization. But this does not mean we should get rid of the state. I have suggested
       elsewhere (Kapoor, 2020: 46–7; Kapoor et al., 2023: 18–20, 163–4) the need for a

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      154                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      reconfigured state (at local, national, and transnational levels) that puts the subaltern first
      in the service of égaliberté (equality-freedom) (Balibar, 2014) and that ensures a modi-
      cum of socioeconomic and environmental infrastructure and regulation – e.g. universal
      health, education, housing; regulation of multinationals; protection of the environmental
      and knowledge commons, etc. – in order that local communities can function, coexist,
      and/or cooperate, rather than dominate or compete with one another.
      Decolonization IS a Metaphor! (And Political Economy Is What Can Help
                                                             
      Materialize It)                                        
      A like problem occurs in another well-known Indigenous-focused text – Tuck and Yang’s
      (2012) ‘Decolonization Is Not a Metaphor’. They, too, argue against a decolonization
      that attends to the cultural-epistemological dimensions of decolonization (decolonizing
      methodologies, pedagogies), thereby denying its material dimensions – in this case, the
      ‘repatriation of Indigenous land and life’ (Tuck and Yang, 2012: 1). For them, cultural
      reconciliation, in obviating land restitution, is a ‘settler move to innocence’ only serving
      to ‘reconcile settler guilt and complicity, and rescue settler futurity’ (pp. 9, 1, 3).
      Decolonization thus only aims at recentring settler whiteness and entitlement by appeas-
      ing the latter’s liberal guilt.                        
        Yet, like Mignolo and Coulthard, Tuck and Yang (2012), too, in their search for
      ‘accountability to Indigenous sovereignty and futurity’ end up calling for an ‘ethic of
      incommensurability’ (pp. 35, 28), thus gesturing toward a decolonial pluriversality.
      What’s missing, again, are the political-economy mechanisms that would allow
      Indigenous communities to withstand the onslaught of global capitalism or the colonial-
      ity of other powerful states. Tuck and Yang insist on the material dimensions of decolo-
      nization, yet the question of materiality is all but absent in their ‘ethic of
      incommensurability’, leaving us wondering how their version of decolonization is not in
      fact a metaphor. They advocate for a kind of pluriversality, yet have no universalizing
      political authority (like a state) to recognize and protect Indigenous difference and
      uniqueness. Like Mignolo and Coulthard, their desire for incommensurability conveni-
      ently sidelines the significant Hegelian point (Hegel, 1977: 114–15) that pluriversal par-
      ticularism/incommensurability actually needs a universality to be understood and
      recognized as particular, distinct, different. Autonomous spaces such as Chiapas in
      Mexico or self-determining Indigenous communities in Canada, Peru, Ecuador, and
      Australia necessitate a universalizing political authority like a trans/national state to
      respect their alterity and guarantee their coexistence (Kapoor and Zalloua, 2022: 102).
        It is not insignificant as well that, despite their critique of settler beneficence toward
      indigeneity (a critique I readily endorse), Tuck and Yang’s own prescriptions tend toward
      an abstract sermonizing. This is evident in the very title of their piece – ‘Decolonization
      Is Not a Metaphor’ – which reads as moralizing. And it is evident in other spots (e.g. pp.
      31, 35–6), notably in the article’s very last claim: ‘To fully enact an ethic of incommen-
      surability means . . . abandoning the hope that settlers may one day be commensurable
      to Native peoples. It means removing the asterisks, periods, commas, apostrophes, the
      whereas’s, buts, and conditional clauses that punctuate decolonization and underwrite
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        155     
                                                             
       settler innocence . . . Decolonization is not an “and”. It is an elsewhere’ (Tuck and Yang,
       2012: 36). Lacking any specifics (particularly the political economy/land mediations
       initially called for in the article), such prescriptions come across precisely as allegorical
       if not sententious.9                                  
        My implication is that Tuck and Yang too quickly jump to (jouissance-filled?) ser-
       monizing conclusions because they do not come to terms with the fact that decoloniza-
       tion is a metaphor: the latter is the consequence of the unavoidable mismatch between
       the symbolic-imaginary order and reality, which makes ambiguity, miscommunication,
       abstraction, metaphoricity inherent to communication (Lacan, 1993: 184). So one impor-
       tant way to minimize the violence of language or the signifier (by definition, there is no
       way to eliminate it), to prevent the too-easy reduction of decolonization to metaphor or
       epistemology, is to actualize it in the form of the material. This is all the more politically
       necessary when the liberal settler state culturalizes politics, thus disavowing, as we have
       previously noted, the key political economy mechanisms affecting those who are multi-
       ply marginalized – the subaltern (Indigenous peoples, lumpenproletariat, precariat, poor
       racialized and gendered people, migrants, etc.). And it is because Tuck and Yang miss
       this key step in their concluding alternative – recognizing decolonization’s inherent met-
       aphoricity and so struggling to find ways of actualizing it – that they end up resorting to
       moralizing and/or abstract prescriptions. In so doing they reproduce the very liberal disa-
       vowal of capital that they rail against, in the same way that Crenshaw and Mignolo,
       especially, do. In this regard, it is no accident that they advocate for an ‘ethic’ of incom-
       mensurability, ethics tending toward consensus (on the moral truth of capitalism or
       indeed on what Indigenous communities themselves find morally acceptable) as opposed
       to (ethico-) politics, which as Rancière (2010) argues (pp. 192–210), would tend toward
       dissensus, disagreement, debate (on capitalism as much as indigeneity). Not dissimilar to
       Mignolo and Coulthard, the dimension of the political is notably absent in Tuck and
       Yang’s viewpoint, preventing their prescriptions from moving from righteous abstraction
       to mediated materiality.                              
       Conclusion                                            
       Intersectionality, decoloniality, and Indigenous localism, each in their own way, mount
       an undoubtedly significant critique of oppression, global modernity, and settler colonial-
       ism/capitalism, respectively, denouncing cultural, epistemological, material, and institu-
       tional domination. But I have claimed that, in spite of such critique – increasingly popular
       today on university campuses and beyond – they each secretly end up accepting if not
       reproducing the status quo: by failing to question the very category of identity defended
       by liberal multiculturalism, in the case of intersectionality; by advocating for a too-easy
       epistemological delinking from coloniality, in the case of decoloniality; and by resorting
       to a localized authenticity, in the case of Indigenous localism (also shared with decoloni-
       ality). In so doing, each disavows capitalist political economy, especially in their pre-
       scriptions, which wind up conforming to the margins tolerated by the System.
       Antisystemic critique thus gets reduced to anti-sexist or anti-racist oppression, ethico-
       cultural and epistemological revival, and/or decentralized isolationism, which, because
       of a reluctance to confront the Real of global Capital, yields to its hegemony.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      156                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
        But it is important, psychoanalytically speaking, to ask why the four analysts under
      consideration do finish up disavowing political economy in favour of identity recogni-
      tion and/or decentralized cultural-epistemological decolonization. Could it be, as I stated
      earlier in relation to Crenshaw and Mignolo, that in the face of the onslaught of global
      capitalism, the offer of only essentialized identity and localized politics is but a form of
      fetishistic disavowal on the part of all four analysts? I am suggesting not merely that their
      seemingly critical responses are an unconscious surrender to global capitalism, but also
      that the championing of authenticity and localized resistance, rather than radical politi-
      cal-economic transformation, is a tribute to this surrender (Kapoor, 2017: 2677). Each
      seeks to raise awareness about multiple social injustices, recognize muted voices, reha-
      bilitate buried knowledges, affirm localized well-being, endorse incommensurability,
      but without taking any meaningful (i.e. material) action for reconstituting the System
      itself. Such a view aligns with Jameson’s (1991) argument that postmodernism is but the
      cultural logic of late capitalism and hence critical but unthreatening. In this sense, the
      so-called progressivism of intersectionality, decoloniality, and Indigenous localism – at
      least of the type advocated by Crenshaw, Mignolo, Coulthard, and Tuck and Yang – is
      integral to the arc of capitalist postmodernity, with their pseudo-radicalism remaining
      within the bounds of the System, and capitalist development tolerating critique as long
      as it does not Real-ly upset the System.               
        My broader reflection, in fact, is the Žižekian one also briefly touched on earlier – that
      such fetishistic disavowal is symptomatic of our late capitalist times (Žižek, 1999), not
      just of intersectionality, decoloniality, or Indigenous localism (or Crenshaw, Mignolo,
      Coulthard, and Tuck and Yang). We, late capitalist subjects, are aware of the socioenvi-
      ronmental inequalities and injustices of the System but act as if we don’t know. We criti-
      cize corrupt political elites and the environmental harms of corporations, sign online
      protest petitions, engage in social media diatribes against the System, yet continue to live
      our lives as though none of that really matters. So inured have we become to cultural
      activism – all the more so in our ‘information age’ – that we seem to have become
      deskilled on how to dismantle the realm of the material (i.e. capitalist political economy).
      Like the above critical theorists, we thus appear to disavow the Real traumas of our age,
      manifesting an unconscious acceptance, if not fetishistic love, for the System – a secret
      desire that nothing too much should change.            
        As others and I have detailed elsewhere (Kapoor, 2020; Kapoor et al., 2023; McGowan,
      2013; Žižek, 1999, 2002), a psychoanalytic politics points, firstly, to the pressing need to
      face up to our libidinal investments in the System if we are to (begin to) dismantle it.
      While much more work and thought remains to be done here, this would involve defet-
      ishizing capitalism, by focusing on political economy not only at the level of knowledge/
      critique, but also and especially at the level of the libidinal – e.g. working through our
      fetishistic disavowal, how capitalist multiculturalist fantasies structure our desires, and
      the ways social institutions seduce us through enjoyment – of capitalism, identity, even
      perverse racial and misogynist exploitation and domination. The point of such defetishi-
      zation is not merely to reform the System to improve the lives of the subaltern, but to
      reconstitute the System in order to prevent subalternization in the first place. And sec-
      ondly, a psychoanalytic politics underlines the importance of the political – the Real/
      unconscious standing for the ever-present gap or excess that besets us as subjects, thereby

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        157     
                                                             
       dooming attempts at unity, harmony, or authenticity. This makes the task of subaltern
       struggles challenging but at the same time potentially all the more subversive: it requires
       addressing inevitable internal division and contestation, while at the same time relying
       on them organically (but never harmoniously) to enable a multipronged attack on sys-
       temic oppression, exploiting the System’s own multiple antagonisms. The Real, in this
       sense, is not to be seen as a necessary weakness, but only as a recurring deadlock with
       perils and opportunities, yet never any guarantees. Which is what necessitates – and
       defines – the political.10                            
       Acknowledgements                                      
       For their invaluable comments on this piece, I would to thank the four anonymous reviewers and
       the TCS editorial board, as well as Leesa Fawcett, Michael Bach, Clint Burnham, and Kent
       Murnaghan. My gratitude, too, to Radhika Mongia and Kajri Jain for entertaining my provocations
       on intersectionality.                                 
                                                             
       ORCID iD                                              
       Ilan Kapoor https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5495-5038     
                                                             
       Notes                                                 
       1. Notable among the growing recent literature in this field are the works of the following inter-
         sectional feminist, queer, Indigenous, anti-racism, and disability analysts: Evans and Lépinard
         (2019), Chaddock and Hinderliter (2019), Haritaworn et al. (2014), Williams (2021), Padilla
         (2021).                                             
       2. I use the term ‘System’ in this article as a short form for ‘Capitalist Liberal-Multicultural
         Democracy’, aimed at underlining how liberal democracy and multiculturalism go hand-
         in-hand with late market capitalism: the former are the political and cultural arrangements,
         respectively, of the latter.                        
       3. Collins and Bilge (2016) take a more materialist approach to intersectionality than Crenshaw,
         but as Carasthatis (2008) suggests (pp. 25–6), their ‘intersectionality of oppression’ still pro-
         duces a congealed intersectional identity, rather than a more desubstantialized and hence
         more resistant subject.                             
       4. Note that Lacan would question the very category of ‘identity’ assumed by intersectionality,
         since for him the process of self-identification is an imaginary process based on misrecogni-
         tion (this is what he calls the ‘mirror stage’), heightened in this case by intersectionality’s
         proclivities toward the enjoyment of identity.      
       5. Crenshaw’s other use of the term ‘class’ is in reference to the legal category, synonymous with
         ‘group’ as in ‘class action lawsuit’ (e.g. Crenshaw, 1989: 6, 10–13).
       6. My critique is a dialectical materialist one (Kapoor et al., 2023: 15–20; Tomšič, 2015; Žižek,
         2012), taking racism, patriarchy, homophobia, ableism deadly seriously, but impossible to
         meaningfully comprehend or address in the absence of political economy.
       7. Psychoanalytic ideology critique stands against the Marxist notion of ideology as manipula-
         tion and misperception (‘false consciousness’), which makes a distinction between ‘truth’
         and ‘lies’/‘falsity’, and hence between the ‘duped’ and the ‘vanguards’, the latter assumed
         to somehow miraculously escape ideological interpellation. The psychoanalytic view avoids
         this significant blind spot by seeing all subjects as ideologically embedded, so that the only
         way to do ideology critique is from within ideology itself, investigating its slip-ups, gaps,
         excesses, contradictions (Žižek, 1989), which is what I am attempting in this article.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      158                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      8. See https://twitter.com/dibyeshanand/status/1431169087023947776 and https://twitter.com/
        Icazarosalba/status/1431354928451100672.             
      9. My subtitle for this section – ‘Decolonization IS a metaphor!’ – is of course also a species
        of sermonizing, excepting that it is qualified by my supplementary section subtitle, ‘And
        Political Economy Can Help Materialize It’.          
      10. Unlike certain variants of (especially) classical Marxism, psychoanalytic Marxism is ada-
        mant that even if a pro-subaltern post-capitalism were possible (a big if), there would be
        no getting rid of disaffection/alienation (i.e. the Real) – a more egalitarian society would
        still suffer the risks of new forms of inequality, hierarchy, and resentment (new exclu-
        sions, privileges, elites, ‘insiders’ and ‘outsiders’) (Kapoor et al., 2023: 11; Kapoor, 2013;
        McGowan, 2013: 9; Žižek, 2006: 266–7). The psychoanalytic point of view, in this sense,
        provides no respite from challenge or political struggle.
      References                                             
      Aguilar, Delia (2015) Intersectionality. In: Mojab, Shahrzad (ed.) Marxism and Feminism. London:
        Zed Books, pp. 203–220.                              
      Ahmed, Sara (2007) The language of diversity. Ethnic and Racial Studies 30(2): 235–256.
      Alfred, Taiaiake (2005) Wasáse: Indigenous Pathways of Action and Freedom. Peterborough:
        University of Toronto Press.                         
      Alfred, Taiaiake (2009) Peace, Power, Righteousness: An Indigenous Manifesto. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.                                    
      Anghie, Antony (2005) Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Anzaldúa, Gloria (1987) Borderlands: The New Mestiza = La Frontera. San Francisco, CA:
        Spinsters/Aunt Lute.                                 
      Applebaum, Barbara (2011) Being White, Being Good: White Complicity, White Moral
        Responsibility, and Social Justice Pedagogy. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
      Asher, Kiran (2013) Latin American decolonial thought, or making the subaltern speak. Geography
        Compass 7(12): 832–842.                              
      Balibar, Etienne (2014) Equaliberty: Political Essays. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
      Baviskar, Amita (2007) Indian indigeneities: Adivasi engagements with Hindu nationalism in
        India. In: de la Cadena, Marisol, and Starn, Orin (eds) Indigenous Experience Today. Oxford:
        Berg, pp. 275–304.                                   
      Buck-Morss, Susan (2009) Hegel, Haiti, and Universal History. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
        Pittsburgh Press.                                    
      Butler, Judith, Laclau, Ernesto, and Žižek, Slavoj (2000) Contingency, Hegemony, Universality:
        Contemporary Dialogues on the Left. London: Verso.   
      Carastathis, Anna (2008) The invisibility of privilege: A critique of intersectional models of iden-
        tity. Les Ateliers de l’éthique / The Ethics Forum 3(2): 23–38.
      Carastathis, Anna (2016) Intersectionality: Origins, Contestations, Horizons. Lincoln, NB:
        University of Nebraska Press.                        
      Chaddock, Noelle and Hinderliter, Beth (eds) (2019) Antagonizing White Feminism:
        Intersectionality’s Critique of Women’s Studies and the Academy. Lanham, MD: Rowman
        & Littlefield.                                       
      Collins, Patricia Hill and Bilge, Sirma (2016) Intersectionality. Malden, MA: Polity.
      Coulthard, Glen Sean (2014) Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition.
        Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.      

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        159     
                                                             
       Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1989) Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist
         critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. University of
         Chicago Legal Forum 1: 139–167.                     
       Crenshaw, Kimberlé (2014) On Intersectionality: The Essential Writings of Kimberlé Crenshaw.
         New York, NY: New Press.                            
       Cusicanqui, Silvia Rivera (2012) Ch’ixinakax Utxiwa: A reflection on the practices and discourses
         of decolonization. South Atlantic Quarterly 111(1): 95–109.
       Deepak, J. Sai (2021) India, That is Bharat: Coloniality, Civilisation, Constitution. New Delhi:
         Bloomsbury Publishing.                              
       Escobar, Arturo (2020) Pluriversal Politics: The Real and the Possible. Durham, NC: Duke
         University Press.                                   
       Evans, Elizabeth and Lépinard, Eléonore (eds) (2019) Intersectionality in Feminist and Queer
         Movements: Confronting Privileges. Oxon: Routledge. 
       Fanon, Frantz (1963) The Wretched of the Earth, trans. Richard Philcox. New York, NY: Grove
         Press.                                              
       Fanon, Frantz (1967) Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles Lam Markmann. New York, NY:
         Grove Press.                                        
       Foley, Barbara (2019) Intersectionality: A Marxist critique. New Labor Forum 28(3): 10–13.
       Fraser, Nancy and Honneth, Axel (2003) Redistribution or Recognition?: A Political-Philosophical
         Exchange. London: Verso.                            
       Haritaworn, Jin, Kuntsman, Adi, and Posocco, Silvia (eds) (2014) Queer Necropolitics. Oxon:
         Routledge.                                          
       Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1977) Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. John Niemeyer Findlay.
         Oxford: Clarendon Press.                            
       Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (2010) The Science of Logic, trans. George Di Giovanni.
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.              
       Jameson, Fredric (1991) Postmodernism or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. London: Verso.
       Kapoor, Ilan (2008) The Postcolonial Politics of Development. London: Routledge.
       Kapoor, Ilan (2013) Humanitarian heroes? In: Fridell, Gavin and Konings, Martin (eds.) Age of
         Icons: Exploring Philanthrocapitalism in the Contemporary World. Toronto: University of
         Toronto Press, pp. 26–49.                           
       Kapoor, Ilan (2017) Cold critique, faint passion, bleak future: Post-development’s surrender to
         global capitalism. Third World Quarterly 38(12): 2664–2683.
       Kapoor, Ilan (2020) Confronting Desire: Psychoanalysis and International Development. Ithaca,
         NY: Cornell University Press.                       
       Kapoor, Ilan and Fridell, Gavin (2024) Rethinking Development Politics. Cheltenham: Edward
         Elgar.                                              
       Kapoor, Ilan, Fridell, Gavin, Sioh, Maureen, et al. (2023) Global Libidinal Economy. Albany, NY:
         SUNY Press.                                         
       Kapoor, Ilan and Zalloua, Zahi (2022) Universal Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Kimmel, Michael S. and Ferber, Abby L. (2016) Privilege: A Reader, 4th edn. Boulder, CO:
         Westview Press.                                     
       Lacan, Jacques (1993) The Psychoses: The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, Book III, ed. Jacques-Alain
         Miller, Reprint edition. New York, NY: W.W. Norton. 
       Lacan, Jacques (1998) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis: The Seminar of
         Jacques Lacan, Book XI, ed. Jacques-Alain Miller. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
       Lugones, Maria (2016) The coloniality of gender. In: Harcourt, Wendy (ed.) The Palgrave
         Handbook of Gender and Development. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 13–33.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      160                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      McCoy, Kate, Tuck, Eve, and McKenzie, Marcia (eds) (2017) Land Education: Rethinking
        Pedagogies of Place from Indigenous, Postcolonial, and Decolonizing Perspectives. New
        York, NY: Routledge.                                 
      McGowan, Todd (2013) Enjoying What We Don’t Have: The Political Project of Psychoanalysis.
        Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.           
      McGowan, Todd (2019) Emancipation After Hegel: Achieving a Contradictory Revolution. New
        York, NY: Columbia University Press.                 
      McGowan, Todd (2020) Universality and Identity Politics. New York, NY: Columbia University
        Press.                                               
      Marx, Karl (1847) The Poverty of Philosophy. Moscow: Progress Publishing.
      Merino, Roger (2016) An alternative to ‘alternative development’?: Buen vivir and human devel-
        opment in Andean countries. Oxford Development Studies 44(3): 271–286.
      Michaelsen, Scott and Shershow, Scott Cutler (2007) Rethinking border thinking. South Atlantic
        Quarterly 106(1): 39–60.                             
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2002) The geopolitics of knowledge and the colonial difference. South
        Atlantic Quarterly 101(1): 57–96.                    
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2007) Delinking. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 449–514.
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2010) Delinking: The rhetoric of modernity, the logic of coloniality and the
        grammar of de-coloniality. In: Mignolo, Walter D., and Escobar, Arturo (eds) Globalization
        and the Decolonial Option. London: Routledge, pp. 303–368.
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2011) The Darker Side of Western Modernity: Global Futures, Decolonial
        Options. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.          
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2012) Local Histories/Global Designs: Coloniality, Subaltern Knowledges,
        and Border Thinking. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Mignolo, Walter D. (2018) Foreword: On pluriversality and multipolarity. In: Reiter, Bernd (ed.)
        Constructing the Pluriverse: The Geopolitics of Knowledge. Durham, NC: Duke University
        Press Books, pp. ix–xvi.                             
      Mounk, Yascha (2023) The Identity Trap: A Story of Ideas and Power in Our Time. New York,
        NY: Penguin.                                         
      Padilla, Alexis (2021) Disability, Intersectional Agency, and Latinx Identity: Theorizing LatDisCrit
        Counterstories. New York, NY: Routledge.             
      Pimblott, Kerry (2020) Decolonising the university: The origins and meaning of a movement. The
        Political Quarterly 91(1): 210–216.                  
      Quijano, Aníbal (2000) Coloniality of power and Eurocentrism in Latin America. International
        Sociology 15(2): 215–232.                            
      Quijano, Aníbal (2007) Coloniality and modernity/rationality. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 168–178.
      Rancière, Jacques (1999) Disagreement: Politics and Philosophy. Minneapolis, MN: University
        of Minnesota Press.                                  
      Rancière, Jacques (2010) Dissensus: On Politics and Aesthetics, trans. Steve Corcoran. London:
        Continuum.                                           
      Robinson, Cedric J. (2019) On Racial Capitalism, Black Internationalism, and Cultures of
        Resistance. London: Pluto Press.                     
      Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake (2011) Dancing on Our Turtle’s Back: Stories of Nishnaabeg
        Re-Creation, Resurgence, and a New Emergence. Winnipeg, Canada: Arbeiter Ring Publishing.
      Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake (2014) Land as pedagogy: Nishnaabeg intelligence and rebellious
        transformation. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society 3(3): 1–25.

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kapoor                                        161     
                                                             
       Smith, Linda Tuhiwai (2012) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous Peoples,
         2nd edn. London: Zed Books.                         
       Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty (1988) Can the subaltern speak? In: Nelson, Cary, and Grossberg,
         Lawrence (eds) Marxism and Interpretation of Culture. Chicago, IL: University of Illinois
         Press, pp. 271–313.                                 
       Thakur, Gautam Basu (2020) Postcolonial Lack: Identity, Culture, Surplus. Albany, NY: SUNY
         Press.                                              
       Tomšič, Samo (2015) The Capitalist Unconscious: Marx and Lacan. London: Verso.
       Tuck, Eve and Yang, K. Wayne (2012) Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization:
         Indigeneity, Education & Society 1(1): 1–40.        
       Turnbull, Paul and Pickering, Michael (eds) (2010) The Long Way Home: The Meaning and
         Values of Repatriation. New York, NY: Berghahn Books.
       Williams, Wendi S. (ed.) (2021) WE Matter!: Intersectional Anti-Racist Feminist Interventions
         with Black Girls and Women. New York, NY: Routledge.
       Zalloua, Zahi (2020) Žižek on Race: Towards an Anti-Racist Future. London: Bloomsbury.
       Zalloua, Zahi (2023) Solidarity and the Palestinian Cause: Indigeneity, Blackness, and the
         Promise of Universality. London: Bloomsbury.        
       Žižek, Slavoj (1989) The Sublime Object of Ideology. London: Verso.
       Žižek, Slavoj (1999) The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology. London:
         Verso.                                              
       Žižek, Slavoj (2002) For They Know Not What They Do: Enjoyment as a Political Factor. London:
         Verso.                                              
       Žižek, Slavoj (2006) The Parallax View. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
       Žižek, Slavoj (2009) First as Tragedy, Then as Farce. London: Verso.
       Žižek, Slavoj (2012) Less than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical Materialism.
         London: Verso.                                      
       Ilan Kapoor is Professor of Critical Development Studies at the Faculty of Environmental and
       Urban Change, York University, Toronto. His research focuses on psychoanalytic and postcolonial
       theory and politics, and ideology critique. He is the author of The Postcolonial Politics of
       Development (Routledge, 2008), Celebrity Humanitarianism: The Ideology of Global Charity
       (Routledge, 2013), and Confronting Desire: Psychoanalysis and International Development
       (Cornell University Press, 2020); editor of the collected volume, Psychoanalysis and the Global
       (University of Nebraska Press, 2018); and co-author, with Zahi Zalloua, of Universal Politics
       (Oxford University Press, 2022); with Gavin Fridell, Maureen Sioh and Pieter de Vries, of Global
       Libidinal Economy (SUNY Press, 2023); and with Gavin Fridell of Rethinking Development
       Politics (Edward Elgar, 2024).                        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
     Explore           and      discover                     
                                                             
                                                             
     more         from        Sage                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
     Sage Perspectives Blog     Information for Authors      
     Sage Perspectives focuses on Our Information for Authors area is essential
     highlighting topical and interesting for all aspiring academic authors. Here,
     research published in Sage books and you can fi nd top reasons to publish with
     journals. The blog includes posts from Sage, resources on how to get published,
     authors across a wide range of subject information on the article submission
     disciplines and research areas. process, Sage’s open access options,
                                ppuubblliisshhiinngg ppoolliicciieess aanndd eetthhiiccss,, aanndd mmoorree..
     bit.ly/sageperspectives    bit.ly/sage_authors          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             