[PAGE 1]
 1353173                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251353173Theory, Culture & SocietyKinsella
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Male Subcultures  in Japan:            2026, Vol. 43(2) 97 –116
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Generating  Sexual Capital                            
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       and Gender-Class   Mobility        sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153135533117733
       in a Low Birth Society              journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
                                                             
       Sharon Kinsella                                       
       University of Manchester                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       In Japan, younger male generations who might identify themselves sub-culturally as
       ‘love market dropouts’ or more unhappily as ‘unpopular’ (himote), are also theorized
       as ‘sexual weaklings’ who have become unable to adapt and survive the processes of
       neoliberalism or female empowerment. Evidence shows that the structural and sexual
       marginalization of these men is configured with changes in employment structures,
       involving a forced flow of men into ‘non-regular’ labour and a ‘working poor’ existence.
       The ongoing dissolution of heteronormative modern society based around masculine
       labour privilege informs many of the themes of otaku and idol fan subcultures in East
       Asia, which are broadly comparable to diverse 21st-century gender subcultures in
       North America and Europe, including the growth of the social media manosphere and
       MGTOW [Men Going Their Own Way] and increased biological male participation
       in queer and nonbinary culture. This article explores how the rise of new modes of
       cute and girlish male cross-dress in 21st-century Japan can be understood as a form
       of inchoate mobilization towards new and unknown directions and relational futures
       predominantly via visual media and digital social space.
       Keywords                                              
       otoko-no-ko, nonbinary, animation subculture, Japanese masculinities, non-marriage,
       himote (incel), sexual capital                        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Recent decades have witnessed the slow fall of ‘hegemonic masculinity’ (Connell and
       Messerschmidt, 2005) and its differing forms in blue and white-collar culture, and the emer-
       gence of multiple countering masculinities (Coles, 2009) through an ongoing reorganization
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Sharon Kinsella. Email: sharon.kinsella@manchester.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      98                              Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      of the ‘socio-sexual order’ (Therborn, 2004: 306). In Japan, the deprivileging of masculinity
      through the reduced wage security of ‘middle-class’ men, which intensified especially after
      the Asian financial crisis of 2007, was accompanied by the efflorescence of a visual and
      performative culture based around animation characters and computer games, sometimes
      referred to as the ‘two-dimensional’ (ni-jigen) world. It is a fictional and animated world
      inhabited, since 1990, partly by the much discussed and problematized enthusiastic male
      idol and animation character fans known as otaku. Within this world there have proliferated
      highly stylized deforume (‘deformed’ and sexualized) images of cute girl (shōjo) figures that
      might be considered a contemporary ‘cult of girls’ (Kinsella, 2013). This article traces recent
      discourse by otaku and other men in Japan against ‘love capitalism’ and the unfairness of
      heteronormative society, which challenge the futility of competing to ‘getto’ (get) women in
      a low-wage and unpredictable labour market. These resentments – similar in elements to
      North American ‘incel’ protest – form a discursive context for a creative subcultural phase
      emerging at a time of extending economic stagnation. Influential movements emerging from
      this phase have been: firstly, the unhappy identity and activism of ‘unwanted’ (himote) men,
      who state that they are excluded from society and hetero-sexual fields, and now prefer con-
      necting to two-dimensional cute animated girl characters over connecting to ‘reality’, and
      secondly, a new mode of cross-dressing by young men to parody or pass as cute girls. From
      2018, male YouTubers and VTubers using cute animated girl avatars and sweet transformed
      voices have also emerged, extending cross-dress posing into online gaming and livestream
      culture. This article draws on the author’s ethnographic data gathered in and around Tokyo
      between 2010 and 2020,1 as well as earlier research on social class and gender expression in
      subcultural and media forms in Japan. This article constitutes a meta-analysis in that it
      bridges several different Japanese subcultural events and ethnographies with the goal of
      detecting and theorizing their deeper positional correspondence, which is further explored
      using theories of cultural and sexual capital. It is hoped that this exercise may also shed new
      and queer light on the dynamics of male feeling and expression in other Asian or European
      locations.2 This article also opens a new phase of work assessing cute and nonbinary aesthet-
      ics and politics embedded into visual and digital socio-cultural life across the transforming
      world and centred especially in the East Asian region. 
        In the mid-2000s two counter-hegemonic subcultural strands, closely linked to male-
      targeted animation, emerged and came to impact the content of otaku subculture, mass-
      media, idol culture, advertising, and entertainment across Japan through the 2010s. One
      was the grassroots expansion of a cross-dressed fashion rooted in parodies of girl idol
      and animation-characters, situated less on the street corners and more in the subcultural
      ‘bedroom’ space (McRobbie and Garber, 1976). Dress-up and make-over videos and
      photographs were performed and uploaded, for online and principally homosocial peer
      appraisal. This new mode of cute josō (male-to-female cross-dressing) grew from fan
      cosplay (costume dress up) of popular shōjo (girl) animation characters by male fans
      (Galbraith, 2019) and followed a new generation of game and animation characters
      designed with ambiguous gender. This new mode of ‘cross dress’ subculture spread to
      mainland China and South Korea from 2010. At the same time a quite different organiza-
      tion emerged, that of support groups for himote or ‘unwanted men’, who felt excluded
      from society and three-dimensional (real) heterosexual romance and who viewed their
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                       99     
                                                             
       precarious employment and lack of physical good looks as the dual sources of this
       exclusion.                                            
        Young male resistance and creative self-expression crystalized in these two heavily
       mediated and sometimes flamboyantly theatrical subcultural movements, gained high
       symbolic currency and tuned in to wider structures of feeling in society, as well as
       becoming central to critique and theory in Japan. While these two formations are not
       generally viewed in relation to each other, it will be suggested here that a relation exists
       in their shared cultural language and origin, that is from the cult of fictional (‘girl’) char-
       acters upon which complex male sentiments are projected. Both movements also operate
       as exile formations outside of ‘reproductive futurism’ and heteronormative society, albeit
       one in a state of dissolution and disarray. In this insecure, de-socialized, and opaque
       employment landscape, and as in Europe and the United States, ‘aesthetic labour’ (Elias
       et al., 2017) to maximize personal appeal and feminine ‘physical capital’ has intensified
       for both genders. For men, aesthetic labour has been a means to increase their competi-
       tive value in employment, homosocial bonding (Tso, 2023) and the heterosexual ‘love
       market’. Subcultural make-up and nonbinary or girlish fashion can be understood in part
       as a playfully deviant extension and mockery of the wider adoption of some ‘feminine’
       self-improvement practices across masculine cultures from the 2000s (Tso, 2023).
        The protest identity of self-identified ‘ugly’ and unwanted men is far from the enthu-
       siastic adoption of make-up and cute girlish clothes by young men who thereby trans-
       form themselves into cute, nonbinary girl personas with visibility, appeal, and added
       ‘sexual capital’. Yet they form polar responses to the conjoined problem of the wholesale
       devaluation of lower and lower middle-class men and their class habitus, cultural dispo-
       sition and income, acquired through the postwar period. Indeed, these alternative collec-
       tive positions of resignation or adaptation can be mapped onto Bourdieu’s (2008: 189)
       comments on the similarly stark choice between demoralized ‘rout’ or ‘collective mobi-
       lization’ facing the unmarriageable French bachelor farmers of Bearn in the 1960s, who
       were left behind to face a rural world that was simply ‘breaking up’ (Bourdieu, 2008: 4).
        The concept of ‘sexual capital’ (Green, 2014), and its more generalized exchange
       beyond sexual markets, towards deployment in social networks, mobility, and employ-
       ment as ‘neoliberal sexual capital’ (Kaplan and Illouz, 2022), can be usefully applied to
       male creative formations in a 21st century social economy that is ‘breaking up’. But how
       far we will continue to use ‘sexual capital’ and ‘masculinity’ as categories to understand
       a desexualized, nonbinary culture and digital social media, appealing to national and
       regional and (very) online male participants, as well as dispersed global audiences of all
       genders, including those mobilized into nonbinary directions, and queer fandoms of ani-
       mation and games (Welker, 2020: 1–5), is not clear. In the fast-evolving sexualized vis-
       ual and social media context, partially replacing the thinning fabric of ‘non-relational’
       (‘muen’) society (Ito et al., 2010), figures on digital screens replace unwanted or unat-
       tainable physical ‘sex’ and ‘romance’ (Kinsella, 2019), along with contingent family and
       community relations. Nascent psychocultural connection organized as mediated desire is
       especially significant for the large and growing cohorts of society who fall outside the
       heterosexual or reproductive matrix. Cultivated and stylized personal appeal in the form
       of typically cute pansexual ‘attraction capital’ located in animated and game characters,
       nonbinary or girlish make-over selfie photography and video postings on social media,

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      100                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      and live-streaming with animated virtual avatars (Bredikhina, 2022), operates success-
      fully in a visual attention and affect economy.        
                                                             
      Male Deprivileging in Japan                            
      For much of 20th-century Japan, masculine power was rooted in systematically privi-
      leged wage-earning, consolidated through homo-socialization linked to the workplace
      (Allison, 1994; Dasgupta, 2013) as well as patrilineal family registers (koseki). It is
      worth noting that hegemonic masculinities in Japan have not been associated with ‘phys-
      ical capital’ (Coles, 2009) in the form of ‘muscles’ or ‘chiselled jaws’ (Monden, 2019),
      which express ‘male power’ in European societies, and particularly in militarily mobi-
      lized areas such as North America.3 However, since the 1990s, increasing numbers of
      Japanese young men have been channelled into the service sector and casual or non-
      regular (hiseiki) employment (Gordon, 2017; Obinger, 2009), leading to mental duress
      and relationship difficulties arising from financial precarity (Allison, 2013; Cook, 2019;
      Nishii, 2020). This re-ordering of the labour market has brought streams of lower and
      middle-class men into direct competition with women for both casual and regular work
      at a time of increasing income disparities and stagnant wages. Deprivileging has been
      concomitant with the shrinking of unpaid female domestic labour and care in the home
      as increasing numbers of women enter employment as an alternative to marriage and
      dependency, precipitating a male sensation of ‘deprivation’ and lost care (Ito et al., 2010).
      Itō Kimio, a pioneer of Men’s Studies in Japan, comments that consequentially: ‘wom-
      en's participation in society and economic independence may even frighten men who
      have been dependent on women through the institution of marriage’ (Itō, 2018: 71).
        Japan’s Basic Survey on Wage Structure (2022: 12) shows four gendered wage
      streams that have changed little since 2005 (see Figure 1). In 2021, 53.6% of all women
      were employed in the non-regular labour force (that is, any work arrangement that is not
      a full-time permanent job), earning an average annual income that is 56% that of regular
      full-time male employees, and 80% of the income of their non-regular male peers.
      Meanwhile, non-regularly employed men, officially 22 to 24% of men in the current
      century, earned 70% of regular male employees’ and 89.5% of regular female employ-
      ees’ pay. Alongside ‘irregular employment’ a hidden strata of low-paid and highly
      exploited and pseudo ‘regular employment’ has also emerged in semi-legal companies
      (Asahina, 2021), which is included in the ‘regular labour’ statistics, along with contract
      employment lasting more than one month, shifted into the ‘regularly’ employed statisti-
      cal category in the Basic Survey from 2018. In summary, the actual proportion of
      employed men channelled into short-term, low-paid and exploitative forms of work is
      likely to be significantly higher than 24% in the 2020s.
        From a modern and post-war labour system which hired almost exclusively men in
      regular career-track and full-time employment (seishain) and almost exclusively women
      in low-paid non-career-track and so-called ‘part’-time employment, what has emerged in
      the 21st century is a situation in which a minority of women in regular secure employ-
      ment are earning more than ever before, at an average of 80% of their male colleagues’
      pay. Meanwhile, increases in the proportion of the workforce in non-regular employment
      from approximately 15 to 40% between 1984 and 2020 results from men moving into
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      101     
                                                             
                                                             
        400                                                  
        350                                                  
                                                             
        300                                                  
        250                                                  
                                                             
        200                                                  
                                                             
        150                                                  
                   full employee woman full employee man     
        100        irregular employee woman irregular employee man
        50                                                   
                                                             
         0                                                   
         2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
                                                             
       Figure 1. A comparison of the average wages of full-time permanent employees and irregular
       employees by gender, 2005–2021. Source: Basic Survey on Wage Structure, 2022.
                                                             
       this category. The proportion of women in irregular employment has remained fairly
       constant at 70.7% in 1985 and 67.7% in 2020 (MHLW, 2018, 2021).
        Here are the grounds for male category discontent – a new and expanded strata of de-
       privileged, irregularly employed bachelor men, earning less than regular male and
       female employees. This new trapped male cohort is corralled like the mass female labour
       force and blocked from ‘upward’ mobility ‘back’ into protected full-time employment by
       the stigma attached to employees with irregular-contract histories (Yu, 2012).
        As is now widely observed, in Japan bachelorhood and a lack of heterosexual rela-
       tionships are closely correlated with insecure employment and a ‘working poor’ context
       (Kobayashi and Kawabata, 2019: 122–7; Satō et al., 2010: 129–43). The five-yearly
       governmental National Fertility Survey (hereafter Nfs) has highlighted a strong correla-
       tion between irregular and casual employment and the lack of an ‘intention to marry
       [within a year]’ in men aged 18 to 34. For men in the self-employed or full-time employ-
       ment categories in 2015, 66.3% ‘planned’ marriage (15th Nfs (n.d.): 15). This fell to 60%
       in 2021. For those in part-time or casual employment (arubaito) this figure was 44.6%
       in 2015, shrinking to 37.6% in 2021 (16th Nfs (n.d.): 21). In addition, the LGBT Workplace
       Survey shows a correlation between being unemployed and selecting ‘M to X’ (male to
       ‘X’ gender) – ‘X’ gender at that time being a domestic term for any of those rejecting
       binary gender. This male to ‘no gender’ group had the highest unemployment figure for
       all gender and sexuality categories at 18.9%, compared to the survey average of 10%.
       Survey respondents designating themselves as ‘M to X’ also had the highest likelihood
       of irregular employment, at 51.1%. The survey average, including women (who would
       otherwise typically occupy the most unfortunate ranking), was 35.4% (NijiVoice, 2018:
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      102                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      26). This is an interesting extension to the description of gendered labour changes to
      keep in mind as we build an integrated understanding of gender-class metamorphosis.
        The numbers of unmarried people living without relationships or lovers has simulta-
      neously increased through the 2000s – to much legacy media amusement. By 2015,
      69.8% of unmarried men and 59.1% of unmarried women aged 18–34 were not in a
      ‘relationship’ (15th Nfs (n.d.): 15). By 2021, this had risen to 78.8% of men aged 30–34
      and 68.9% of women (16th Nfs (n.d.): 29). Of this group of single unmarried men and
      women, approximately a third (15th Nfs (n.d.): 28) stated, furthermore, that they had no
      interest in having a heterosexual relationship in the future. This figure rises with age. For
      men aged 30–34, disinterest in instigating any form of relationship with women had
      increased rapidly in the 2010s. In 2010, 27% of single men had no desire to have a rela-
      tionship; this rose to 31.1% in 2015, and rose again to 40.7% in 2021. Interestingly the
      number of unmarried respondents in the survey who ticked ‘don’t get along with oppo-
      site gender/heterosexual relations’ (isei to umaku tsukiaenai) as their reason for being
      unmarried had increased in the 2010s too. In 2015, 14.3% of men aged 25–34 listed this
      as their reason for bachelorhood, and this figure rose to 20% in 2021 (16th Nfs (n.d.):
      27–29).                                                
        Here is the statistical trace of contraction away from heterosexuality and intra-gender
      bonding. These tendencies towards declining heterosexual relations have emerged simul-
      taneously with the entrenchment of homosocial clustering in online culture and social
      media, and the rise of both nonbinary and male cross-dress performance, as well as
      himote (unwanted male) identity politics and resentment towards women.
      From Bachelorhood to Strategic Nonmarriage             
      Focus on the rise of singles and the imagined ‘bachelor aristocracy’ (dokushin kizoku) of
      unburdened and wealthy urban unmarrieds (coterminous with the ‘yuppies’ or shinjinrui)
      surfaced in the 1980s. As a new market for casual employment as a ‘freeter’ and tempo-
      rary work magazines emerged during the 1980s, finding work became not only a closed
      system of arrangements but also a lifestyle choice. The marriage system was simultane-
      ously becoming less imposed by family and social pressure and more an individual
      choice to find ‘free love’ in the emerging ‘marriage market’ (kekkon no ichiba). Both
      these sites of selective participation gave rise to higher unemployed and higher non-
      marriage figures, according to Morinaga (1997: 40–42), a celebrity economist and author
      of popular books on the economy. Ten years later, Morinaga became the first otaku-camp
      advocate of a ‘positive single life’ for men. A Proposal for Nonmarriage (1997) encour-
      aged men not to be involuntarily ‘marriage unemployed’ but to choose instead to avoid
      the economic disadvantages of marriage – supporting a dependent wife and children at
      unaffordable housing and educational costs. Rather than joining the growing ranks of the
      struggling unmarried (mikon), thoughtful men of limited income should voluntarily elect
      to be permanently non-married (hikon).                 
        Morinaga argues that an oppressive postwar ‘marriage hegemony’ is rooted in the
      pro-natalist policies of Imperial Japan for which universal marriage and high fertility
      were closely integrated as demographic nurseries for the ‘high defense state’ (Morinaga,
      1997: 17–18). He goes on to describe the postwar gender system of male breadwinning
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      103     
                                                             
       and housewife dependency on husbands as one perpetuated through ‘maternal mind con-
       trol’ (Morinaga, 1997: 22), generating policy which financially benefits only married
       women. Arguing against the impact of the married tax allowance that provides family
       support in the form of lower income taxes for married couples (where the smaller spousal
       income does not exceed 1.3 million yen per annum), Morinaga suggests this policy has
       held back social change, forcing men to become primary wage-earners to support
       dependent wives, while simultaneously motivating married women and their employers
       to limit female employment to low-paid work. Morinaga has also been sharply critical of
       the social class bias of state pensions given to ‘fulltime housewives’ (sengyō shufu),
       arguing that this policy protects ‘elite housewives’ at the expense of dual working par-
       ents and working single mothers who also pay taxes, but cannot financially afford to
       support a full-time homemaker themselves.             
       Love Capitalism                                       
       These critiques of the postwar family and labour policy laid the foundations for male
       subcultural discourse about women that uses market mechanism as its core logic. The
       first mentions of male ‘sexual weaklings’ surfaced in the late 1990s in libertarian socio-
       logical discourse (Miyadai, 1998) on otaku subculture and the male oglers of schoolgirl
       street style (Kinsella, 2013). Popular author Koyano Atsushi re-configured this conde-
       scending term to ‘love weaklings’ and created the framework for a sympathetic defence
       of the unmarried and ‘unwanted man’ as a romantic outsider. In Unpopular Men, Koyano
       (1999) argues that the stigma experienced by men unable to attain the love of women is
       social discrimination. Other authors of popular non-fiction, notably Miura (2009), pro-
       posed that a Men’s Protection Law (Dansei hogohō) should be enacted to prevent the
       possibility of discrimination between men determining who will gain access to good
       employment and love. It reflected sensitivity to growing class inequalities between men
       and the feeling that unpopular men were victims of a destructive new union of demand-
       ing women and the free market, experiencing discrimination from both. This logic lurked
       in popular male discourse well into the 2000s (Mitadera, 2018) and has similarities with
       the biological determinist logic of incel groups in the Anglosphere (Utterbeck, 2024), as
       well as a popular association of girls with uncritical enthusiasm for business, extending
       as far as the controversial Semiotext(e) Theory of the Young Girl as the human embodi-
       ment of neoliberal capitalist dynamics (Tiqqun, 2012).
        In a volley of books written from the mid-2000s onwards, Honda Tōru developed the
       theme of disadvantaged men into a critique of ‘love capitalism’ (renai shihonshugi).4 In
       Radio Man (2005) and Burning Man (2005), followed by A Melancholic Man’s History
       of Philosophy (2006), World Radio Man (2008), and The Power of Disappointment
       (2009), Honda crystallized his brilliant instincts and crude literary and gender analysis to
       portray the ‘exodus’ of ‘gross’ (kimo) unpopular men and otaku who drop out of society
       and ‘flee reality’ (Honda, 2008: 42). Honda’s core protagonist, ‘melancholic ugly man’
       (kimomen modan), learns to live in the two-dimensional sphere of animation and com-
       puter games to avoid pointless striving to compete for a partner under ‘love capitalism’
       only to be rewarded by a heartless commercial ‘sex hell’. Kimomen modan rejects the
       heterosexual marriage ideology which incites working hard to gain income, to consume
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      104                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      goods and services, and to improve one’s appearance in order to gain women’s love, sex,
      and thus broader social approval (Honda, 2008: 12). Instead, he suggests that the joy of
      two-dimensional stimulation cannot be scientifically distinguished from joy stimulated
      by real world interactions, because both produce the same chemical response in the brain
      where joy is registered (Honda, 2008: 30). Honda’s writing on achieving satisfaction in
      a two-dimensional world fits a wider political critique and defence of male otaku subcul-
      ture and as an alternative fictional world beyond ‘realism’ and beyond critical judge-
      ment. Influential sociologist Miyadai Shinji estimates that ‘regarding reality and fiction
      as functionally equivalent’ became widespread in subculture from 1996 (Miyadai, 2011:
      255). However, the cry of loss and pain tangible in Honda’s book titles listed above is
      more convincing than his biological arguments about the relativity of happiness.
      The Protest of Unwanted Men                            
                                                             
      With the emergence of online blogging from the mid-2000s, himote (being unwanted)
      became an identity, based on the shared sense of inferiority of men unable to attract a
      girlfriend (Nishii, 2020: 97). Several support organizations for himote emerged, the most
      visible of which was the Revolutionary League of Unwanted Men (abbreviated as
      Kakuhidō), founded in 2006 and folding in 2022. The witty street demos of Kakuhidō,
      strategically organized in Tokyo’s consumer hubs on Japanese romantic holidays such as
      Christmas Eve and Valentine’s Day (‘Valentine, Funsai!’ – Smash Valentine’s Day!),
      attempted to critique and politicize heterosexual dating through the 2010s. Using the
      Marxian language of Honda Tōru, Kakuhidō agitated for government policy to alleviate
      the unfair situation of impoverished and unpopular men, facing lives of isolation and
      failure as those unable to support families.           
        Kakuhidō staged retro ’60s parody demos, dressing in the style of the Revolutionary
      Middle-Core faction (Chukaku-ha)5 – members in ‘battle-stave style’ (geba-sutairu) out-
      fits, including construction site helmets bearing slogans punning with those of the ’60s
      faction. This attracted local and international news coverage, such as The Guardian’s
      ‘Japanese Misanthropes March against “Passion Capitalism” of Valentine’s Day’ (12
      February 2015), and gained considerable attention for himote activism. Less aired was
      the hostility of the group towards women performing unpaid domestic and reproductive
      work. Chairman Mark Water (his chosen ‘Irish republican’ pseudonym) made it clear
      that while he considered himself a feminist he could not agree with the ‘disgusting and
      complacent’ position of women who expected their partners to support them financially
      while they declined to get jobs. This vein of himote politics continued Morinaga Takuro’s
      argument for deprivileging elite ‘full-time housewives’ who are a burden on the tax-
      paying working singles and poor. Mark Water wore a plastic tabard bearing the slogan
      ‘Marry and be defeated!’ and set out the League’s challenge for me in 2013:
        The government says you must get married, you must have children, as though we are going to
        go and get married and live a fulfilled ‘real’ [i.e. not two-dimensional] life . . . if they want us
        to do that well then let’s talk social policy. Reduce rents and raise wages, then we’ll see. (Mark
        Water interview, 3 August 2013; Josō, 2020: Ch. 8)   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      105     
                                                             
       Despite resentment towards women still striving to marry into the postwar model of full-
       time housewife, through the 2010s Kakuhidō asserted that ‘himote is fundamentally a
       class problem’ (Mark Water, second interview, 16 August 2015). Unwanted men also
       tended to draw heavily on animation subculture (Slater and Galbraith, 2011). Chairman
       Mark Water proudly asserted that he is a moe animation fan (attracted to stylized shōjo
       girl characters) and refuses to credit ‘reality’ over fiction, stating that he would ‘rather
       relax and watch animation in his free time than chase romance for the benefit of the
       nation’ (second interview, 16 August 2015). Another Kakuhidō member in his 40s
       explained what he perceived to be the ‘standard himote pattern’, using his own case as an
       example. The ‘awful feeling left inside’ him after many failed attempts to initiate roman-
       tic encounters with women in high school and university drove him to take solace from
       this collective rejection in the triumvirate of idol-fandom, animation and games which
       comprised his ‘otaku pastimes’. This local government civil servant recalled that ‘the
       first crack’ leading him to animation fandom occurred when he found himself transfixed
       by the shojō characters of the leading ‘magical girls’ animation series Sailor Moon (inter-
       view, 16 August 2015; Josō, 2020: Ch. 8).             
        According to Itō (2018), unmet male dependency on the care of women has led to the
       ‘masculinization of [feeling] deprivation’ for those men excluded from the structure of
       marriage, family and employment, and who are, quite simply, not loved. Itō proposes
       that himote men need training to help them to turn into ‘men who care’ for each other and
       to gain self-awareness, because ‘Even when they are in the position of being cared for,
       they are unable to recognize their dependence on others. They do not appreciate the peo-
       ple around them on whom they depend. Rather, they are overbearing and angry’ (Itō,
       2018: 75). Retraining ‘unwanted’ men to be more conscious of giving and taking is a task
       of mutual learning and support, which clinical social researcher and sympathetic tōjisha
       (fellow experiencer) Nishii Kai has also explored in his 2017–18 research – ‘Our Himote
       Research Group’ (Nishii, 2020, 2021). Through this workshop, Nishii found that many
       participants who classified themselves as himote shared a common ideal about the
       importance of finding a single special woman, a ‘goddess’, who could transform their
       lives in a ‘one-shot reversal’ (Nishii, 2020: 106). Often an idealized notion of a young
       and cute goddess led the participants to become fixated on women they met who showed
       them kindness, leading to a second pattern of inappropriate proclamations of love and in
       some cases stalking, which then led to further rejection and deeper losses of self-esteem
       (Nishii, 2020: 109). The propensity for idolizing unattainable young pop idols and cute
       animation characters, which may indeed be scripted as ‘princesses’ or ‘goddesses’, is
       also at the core of animation, manga, and computer game fiction.
       Feminist Critique                                     
       Kakuhidō’s insistence that himote men are the new proletariat intersects with Japanese
       feminist arguments about how to respond to the problem of ‘male weaklings’. In her article
       ‘Himote Misogyny’, feminist Ueno Chizuko counters claims that himote are men excluded
       from having girlfriends, by pointing out that these men have rejected older women or ‘ugly’
       women and can only imagine objectified and cute shōjo as their partners, not real women.
       An example is Katō Tomohiro, who in 2008 killed seven people in a Tokyo shopping dis-
       trict by running them down with his truck and slashing them, subsequently claiming that he
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      did it because he despaired of his lonely life without a girlfriend. Ueno goes on to decry the
      sole focus of social debate on the increasing impoverishment of ‘weakling men’, while
      neglecting mention of the worse plight of many women (Ueno, 2009: 35). Using the same
      keywords, queer feminist scholar Shimizu Akiko adds that amongst the hidden ‘female
      weaklings’, ‘single mothers especially’ live at the extremes of precarity, far below that of
      the ‘male weaklings’ (Shimizu interview, 16 August 2015; Josō, 2020: Ch. 4).
        Other voices have suggested, however, that Ueno’s dismissal of himote suffering is too
      close to that of the neoliberal regime which overlooks the real structures of inequality that
      shape human choices (Ishida, 2012: 146–7), including those of unwanted men. Feminist
      Kaizuma Keiko suggests that the much discussed ‘communication skills’ that critics such
      as Miyadai Shinji and Ueno argue ‘male weaklings’ must acquire to overcome their impasse
      and rebuild good relationships with women (Ueno, 2009: 42) are not universal. Rather
      (paraphrasing Ueno), Kaizuma argues that the male mindset which stubbornly persists in
      thinking ‘as long as I have status, wages, and don’t look too bad, a woman will come along
      without me saying a word’, is fundamentally that of the ‘lower middle class’ (chūryū kaikyū
      kasō), which is at the same time the illusory ‘class-less’ (hikaikyūteki) white collar strata
      that has historically formed the focus of working-class aspirations towards upward social
      mobility in the postwar period (Kaizuma, 2010: 141). For these men, who potentially lack
      the requisite cultural capital and disposition to have much facility with ‘talk’, the judge-
      ment that they must acquire ‘communication skills’ is effectively a pronouncement of the
      closure of their aspirations. As sons of lower middle-class and white-collar men fail to get
      secure employment and engage in the pursuit of marriage, it exposes the cultural distinc-
      tion between themselves and the more established middle classes who are maintaining
      positions of regular employment and family formation (Kaizuma, 2010: 141).
        An inchoate sense of these disturbing new hierarchies emerging in social circles and
      labour markets haunts the less coherent musings of unwanted men. Honda Tōru talks of a
      hierarchy of: ‘good-looking men (ikemen), secondly women, thirdly ugly men (kimomen)’,
      in which good-looking men monopolize and financially benefit from women, while ugly
      men are exploited by women and cannot reverse the hierarchy (Honda, 2005). In 2015 an
      anonymous Kakuhidō member suggested that the ‘order of causality has been reversed – it
      is not social class inequality that determines whether you have a lover or not, so much as
      whether you have lovers or not that forms the basis of social class’ (Josō, 2020: Ch. 8).
      Celebrity otaku-linked economist Morinaga Takuro proposed an absurd economic solution
      to push ‘ugly’ men higher up the love market hierarchy: a heavy tax on good-looking men,
      reducing their attractiveness to women as life partners (Asahi Shinbun Digital Edition,
      2012). Strong sensations that gender and class rankings were being re-ordered in unreason-
      able ways corresponded to actual shifts in gendered employment in the labour market.
      Cross-dressing and Media-oriented Sexuality            
      While himote experience was that of a confounding and injurious socioeconomic demo-
      tion, other men appear to have reacted to ‘dropping out of the love market’ by experi-
      ments with personal transformation, involving cultivating the very charm, ‘communication
      skills’ and ‘looks’ that himote earnestly believed they lacked and could never gain.
        The deviant frisson of real young men performing dance routines in cosplay (live
      enactment of two-dimensional characters by fans) as shōjo animation characters was
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      107     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Figure 2. Young man posing in a fashionable cute version of the resonant schoolgirl uniform,
       on the cover of the launch issue of Otoko-no-ko Club (Gorakubu) magazine in 2010. Accessed and
       used with the kind permission of chief editor Idō Takashi.
                                                             
       witnessed on the pedestrianized streets of Akihabara (Tokyo’s geographic centre of ani-
       mation fan subculture) from the mid-2000s. Before long these risqué cross-dressed pub-
       lic otaku provocations were quashed by city police (Galbraith, 2019: 149–54).
       Cross-dressed maid cafés founded around Akihabara in 2008 and 2009 brought this erup-
       tion of deviant fun indoors, bringing manga characters and cosplay further into three-
       dimensional live fashion and subculture.              
        Through the 2010s, girlish josō (male cross-dressing) also evolved into josō selfies
       and make-over video uploading, and a rapidly emerging grassroots culture of college and
       high school student live beauty and talent shows, known as Misuta Bishojō (‘Mr Beautiful
       Girl’) competitions (Kinsella, 2019: 7–8; Miyazaki, 2023). Amateur josō talent competi-
       tions featured parodies of female singers and pop-idol dance routines, especially
       entrenched in the ‘gloomy’ (kurai) homosocial student culture of the overwhelmingly
       male engineering and science campuses. The fun (akarui) new sartorial style for young
       men became known as otoko-no-ko, after the first use of this term to define the pretty
       cross-dressed boy characters in computer games and manga fanzines (see Figure 2; Ho,
       2021; Kinsella, 2019; Miyazaki, 2023).                
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
        According to manga critic Nagayama Kaoru, the cross-over of male readers to the
      girls’ homoerotic manga genre ‘Boys’ Love’ in the 1990s germinated a new tolerance
      amongst male readers for characters with diverse gender and sexual orientations
      (Nagayama, 2015: 153). This breach in the homophobic defences of heterosexual readers
      allowed a flow of cross-dressed boy characters – visually identical to shōjo girls – into
      the heart of best-selling weekly boys’ manga magazines such as Shōnen Jump and
      Shōnen Animal (see Kinsella, 2019: 41–6). Leading characters with nonbinary figuration
      began to gain popularity in computer and mobile games too, including Fate Grand Order
      (FGO), the immensely successful fantasy game released by Type Moon in 2015. The
      FGO character consistently voted most loved by players is the coquettish yet muscular
      Astolph (Saber), clad in minimalist armour and a sexy shojō character outfit. Astolph
      was later joined by other historical ‘transgender’ characters such as Chevalier d’Eon.
        Otoko-no-ko performance, neither wholly feminine nor proto-feminist, was laced
      with hammed-up laddish-ness and lower-class machismo (Kinsella, 2019: 20–21), and
      some elements of misogyny (Miyazaki, 2023: 131–4), as were amateur male college
      student parodies of girl-band dance performances that titillated raucous crowds of their
      peers. Nostalgic sampling of blue-collar masculinity and macho speech from earlier
      postwar decades, combined with girly cross-dress, generated a hybrid gender perfor-
      mance and comedic burlesque. Otoko-no-ko style drew on the Victorian-esque layered
      skirts and aproned maid outfits of 1990s Goth Loli fashion, and aspects of the edginess
      of visual-kei rock – itself often performed in ‘drag’ with elaborate make-up and towering
      impressive hairdos. Both visual-kei rock of the 1990s and otoko-no-ko of the 2010s have
      been described as ‘queer’ or ‘gender-bending’, though not specifically focused on either
      gender identity or sexual orientation (Johnson, 2020). Discussing the aesthetic of weini-
      ang (fake-girl) subculture in China, which is directly inspired by and engages transna-
      tionally with otoko-no-ko culture in Japan, Shih-chen Chao suggests that this is ‘theatrical
      queer’ comprised of keiai (cuteness) and gender non-conformity, and through this is
      challenging the ‘real-world heteronormative discourse’ of gendered social roles (Chao,
      2017: 39).6                                            
      ‘Love Market Dropouts’                                 
      Chazuke is an individual closely involved in pioneering otoko-no-ko fashion, coming
      from a pre-history of immersion in both erotic computer game fandom and modelling for
      Goth Loli magazines in both Goth and femme outfits. In 2008 he launched his first josō
      maid café stall, and in 2009 he became the manager of Newtype otoko-no-ko café bar on
      the outskirts of the animation fandom area, Akihabara. So far as otoko-no-ko sexual ori-
      entation is concerned, Chazuke suggests ‘anything goes’ (dō demo ii). While the question
      about sexuality is treated with tolerant disinterest, Chazuke goes on to raise what is per-
      tinent – that ‘everyone’s a love market dropout’ (mina ren’ai ichiba ochikobore) and that
      he himself was probably a-romantic/a-sexual. (Chazuke interview, 18 February 2020).
      This is a perspective repeated by Idō Takaaki through his experience as the chief editor
      of the subcultural/pornographic magazine Age of the Otoko-no-ko (Otoko-no-ko no
      Jidai) through the 2010s. In response to a question about who might be sexually attracted
      to otoko-no-ko models and maid café hosts, he concisely responded:
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      109     
                                                             
        Otoko-no-ko are fundamentally ‘unwanted’ [motenai].7 The basic underlying psychology
        behind the otoko-no-ko boom and wanting to be an otoko-no-ko model is very low self-
        confidence in their masculine sexuality. (Idō interview, 20 February 2020)
       Ethnography suggests that otoko-no-ko are not oriented to any positions in the (for them)
       now-faded post-war family system of binary divides between man and woman, but are
       rather rivetted by the frisson of refusing gender and sexuality categories altogether. To do
       this they needed to be cute, well-groomed, and aligned to girls’ fashions (also modelled
       and remoulded onto animation characters and pop-idols) and feminine care-of-the-self.
       Boys in dresses, bras, wigs and make-up invested many hours in ‘aesthetic labour’ to
       become the subjects of adoration and acknowledgement amongst their peers:
        I really love looking in the mirror at myself after I have put make up on. (Anonymous interview,
        26-years-old, 2019)                                  
                                                             
       One of the most consistent foci activity and online content was make-up and clothes
       fashion:                                              
                                                             
        I really love make-up. When I am in make-up, I feel confident and I feel like I enjoy my life
        more. I hate being given orders, but if it’s orders about make up then even orders are absolutely
        okay! (Anonymous interview, 29-years-old, 2019)      
       For participants working in cross-dress otoko-no-ko cafes and bars, applying make-up
       became part of their job to attract and satisfy customers (who were increasingly com-
       prised of women of all ages attracted to the ‘beautiful boy’ (bishōnen) hosts). For ‘ama-
       teurs’ following the first subcultural kick spanning from approximately 2008 to 2015,
       however, the focus remained on male homosocial play in groups of male peers, and often
       at weekends or leisure time only:                     
                                                             
        In the early days [2012], on FC2 and live chat channels many male fans who love josō would
        come and gather. At that time, transforming myself into something else in front of people was
        fun, I was thrilled. (Anonymous interview, 29-years-old, otoko-no-ko café host, dropped out of
        university, 2019)                                    
        At the weekend and sometimes on a weeknight I put on make-up, take pictures . . . and play
        around. I do it as much as possible, whenever I feel like it. It’s my own aesthetic, I don’t think
        it has anything to do with wanting a lover. (Anonymous interview, 26-years-old, 2019)
                                                             
       As magazine editor Idō Takaaki points out, buying and learning to use make-up and girls’
       clothes became much easier for men from the 2010s. Cosplay manuals and online josō
       make-up and fashion guides became widely available (Idō email, 4 March 2019). Otoko-
       no-ko found that, as ‘daughters’, they could change their looks dramatically, gain visibil-
       ity amongst peer groups, and have more fun with friends:
        Sometimes when I am with my friends, all cross-dressing, we have great fun being far too
        foolish. The way I look at the world is different. (Anonymous interview, 25-years-old, literature
        major and department store employee, 1999)           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      110                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
        I usually do the foundation and base level make-up every day and put full make-up on only at
        weekends when I can take my time. Also, when I am playing with friends, we try our best to get
        the most perfect look and then go out into the city to walk around. It’s for self-expression.
        (Anonymous interview, 24-years-old, casually employed, 1999)
      The dress-up focus of otoko-no-ko activity can be compared to the fancy clothes tastes
      and skin-care habits of flashy young men from Newcastle who were the original subjects
      of the concept ‘metrosexual’ in 1990s England. Mark Simpson, who coined the term,
      commented that the young working-class men who displayed this unmanly attention to
      their appearances came from a social class accustomed to selling their bodies as physical
      labour in the heavy industries. Re-assignment of these working bodies into objects of
      gym-trained beauty and sartorial charm was a relatively straightforward transition and
      part of a wider re-orientation towards service industry jobs (2013: 19). While the social
      origins of individuals drawn to otoko-no-ko culture defy easy examination, ethnographic
      evidence suggests that many of its principal pioneers, later becoming models and café
      bar hostesses, were drawn from boys who had dropped out of or did not attend high
      school (Kinsella, 2019: 20–21), implying potentially lower class origins. Styles of lower
      class masculinity of the postwar past (and possibly missed by the participants) were
      flaunted in burlesque lads’ play and comedic invocation of blunt blue-collar male voices,
      which became a part of the otoko-no-ko performative repertoire (Josō, 2020: Ch. 10). In
      a similar vein to the metrosexual’s ambivalent sexuality and narcissism (Simpson, 2013:
      v), otoko-no-ko expression was bound up with male creative deviance and play through
      gaining visibility with appealing looks.               
      Sexual Capital and ‘Attractability’                    
      New looks and cross-dress persona threw otoko-no-ko into the limelight and a state of
      intensified self-improvement, attention, and communication. Their performance, wit-
      nessed most often as cross-dress girl-band parodies and makeover videos and photos
      uploaded online, can be considered a form of highly cultivated appeal in the form of
      visual, mediated, and polymorphous ‘sexual capital’, giving these men new points of
      social leverage and reach. As Adam Green suggests, ‘convertibility makes sexual desir-
      ability not just an index of power within a field but a structural bridge that can connect
      one field with another’ (2014: 48). The appeal of cute cross-dressed young men was
      deployed as a convertible value that quickly produced social visibility and recognition
      and could act as a route to new friendships, networks, and cultural scenes.
        In the context of the low levels of relationship-forming amongst irregularly employed
      men, this was less a tactile ‘sexual capital’ to exchange directly with partners than a
      coquettish and visual performance of ‘attraction capital’ for mediated exchange, as pho-
      tographs, videos and animated avatars disseminated in visual culture and digital social
      media. The ubiquitous model for this asexual sexual capital was the cute and enchanting
      but protected and unobtainable shōjo (girl) pop-idol or animation character. For young
      otoko-no-ko who found themselves excluded from marriage-oriented society, attraction
      through cute girlishness was acquired through extensive aesthetic investment and self-
      discipline – often the topic of josō video’s uploaded online. As Farrer and Dale (2014:
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      111     
                                                             
       165) note, ‘gender-shifting is not simply passively received; it can also be understood as
       a strategy of adjustment within a social and sexual field’. Performed girlishness was a
       strategy of adjustment to the stark new circumstances of social devaluation affecting
       primarily men from lower white-collar and blue-collar classes.
        Heightened inequalities between men in a period of austerity and recession placed
       intensive peer scrutiny on the deployment of a range of more intangible personal skills,
       especially ‘communication skills’, ‘personality’ and ‘looks’, for men both inside and
       outside of regular employment (Tso, 2023). Incentive to trade on these social skills and
       adaptable dispositions increased, as the hitherto systematized distribution of social and
       educational capital failed to gain the expected rewards. However, pressure to utilize
       additional resources beyond the system of educational accreditation highlighted the lack
       of disposition towards these ‘extra-curricular’ skills amongst self-identified ugly and
       unwanted men (himote).                                
        Interestingly, otoko-no-ko cross-dressers and himote, while quite separate cultural for-
       mations, shared the same fixation with looks. The himote obsession with being ‘ugly’
       (kimomen) was the inverse equivalent of the otoko-no-ko preoccupation with becoming
       cute, desirable, and hip. Kaizuma notes the importance of appearances to himote ideas
       about their social exclusion: ‘they are solely fixated with the wild delusion that it is
       because they are not good-looking’ (2010: 141). By grasping onto a biological theory of
       natural ‘ugliness’, himote evade discussion of their deeper state, namely the lack of dis-
       position or capacity to adapt and transform themselves in the face of new conditions.
       Being ‘ugly’ may also have served to disguise an element of conscious refusal to adapt
       and succumb to the needs of neoliberal capital and the imperative to manage their appear-
       ance and care about appealing to others – like girls. 
        The proliferation of nonbinary sexual bodies in animation, computer games, online
       avatars, and fashion cross-dressing hint at the potentially vast sea changes emerging in
       the organization of culture, self, and sexuality in the 21st century around the world.
       These changes are distinctively crystallized in subcultural expression in Japan and neigh-
       bouring Asian countries (China and Korea), where engagement and investment via ani-
       mation characters and cute digital visual culture – and, indeed, queer cute fashion,
       livestreaming, and cosplay – has become a regional digital cultural language (Chao,
       2017; Zhang and Hjorth, 2019). The growing alternative attraction (known as moe) to
       cute animation-based characters and cultural fiction has also become closely configured
       to and converted into an increasing ambivalence towards performing fixed genders and
       sexual orientations in the ‘reality dimension’ (riaju). For young men who share a starting
       point in the prolific otaku cultural hub, animated visual culture is often a valued replace-
       ment for stigmatizing and negative encounters with real-world employment and a social
       life based on unattainable gendered roles and social class markers. Fandom of unreal and
       fictional bodies rejects real world expectations and what philosopher Chiba Masaya has
       called ‘realism based on a division of the genders’ (2018: 102). The love of nonbinary
       animated characters and knowing male play as impossibly cute girl personae rejects the
       cruel optimism of capitalism. As fixed genders and sexual orientations based on gen-
       dered social roles vanished into the golden postwar decades of Japan’s ‘economic mira-
       cle’ of the past, a polymorphous, pre-social, and de-humanized sexual desire, theorized a
       decade earlier by philosopher Hiroki Azuma (2009 [2001]), had by the 2010s become a

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      112                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      ‘queer animalization’, according to Chiba (2018: 110). This is a mode of attraction to
      fictional and mediated characters for which sexual desire based on encountering ‘real’
      bodies has unravelled, rendering sexual orientation and gender no longer inherently
      meaningful.                                            
        The gradual shift over to two-dimensional and online social media forms the techno-
      logical context for the move towards a mediatized expression of not so much a gender or
      sexual capital as attractability – a nonbinary and labile quality of detached and surveilled
      personal appeal. It is an animation-sourced culture of cute and visual attractivity (moe),
      which refuses the socially ‘real’ and responsible, the laborious and the serious, and
      reminds us of another Chiba phrase – ‘the lightness of the Heisei [post 1990] body’
      (Chiba, 2019: 96). This is the visual sexual capital of the cute nonbinary fictional body
      which is virtual and weightless and remains in a state of becoming (katoki), performing
      and appealing. It is an orientation which refuses to commit to, and therefore to risk, being
      defined in fixed gender or class terms, least of all in a masculine guise, within a trans-
      forming and unpredictable economic and social environment in which an orientation
      towards adaptability and mobility is paramount.        
      Acknowledgements                                       
      The author would like to thank the Japan Foundation Endowment Committee and the British
      Academy for funding research at several points during the 2010s, all of which has significantly
      supported the research discussed in this article.      
      ORCID iD                                               
      Sharon Kinsella https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3542-3778  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. Interviews cited in this article were carried out between 2013 and 2020 during three fieldwork
        and filmmaking (2013, 2015) visits to Tokyo. Interviews were conducted with a media pro-
        fessional involved in producing subcultural publications and with 24 individuals self-identi-
        fied as either himote (unwanted men) or otoko-no-ko (cross-dress/nonbinary men). A few of
        these men were well-known and entrepreneurial figures in the media: most were anonymous
        younger men in their 20s encountered at otoko-no-ko events – particularly at the monthly
        Propaganda club night and Yuri Danshi publishing events. Fuller ethnographic and event
        details can be found in Kinsella (2019, 2020). Some quoted comments, sartorial styles and
        events can be witnessed directly in the ethnographic film Josō (2020, Dir. Kinsella), which
        incorporates some filmed fieldwork interviews.       
      2. Japan and neighbouring Asian states are now conjoined in a transregional visual cultural sym-
        bolic language, with relatable though not identical cultural symbolic meanings, based around
        animation characters and computer games. In Sinophone Asia this is known as ACG ‘anima-
        tion-comics-games’, or as AVGC in India. It is known as ‘anime’ by enthusiastic young men,
        and female and LGBTQ-leaning fans, across Europe and the Americas (Welker, 2020).
      3. Masculinity has been more open to a physical aestheticization. Slim, fit, attractive men (ike-
        men) with longer hair and soft facial features have been a fashionable male ideal from the
        late postwar period (Miller, 2003). Everyday male make-up and long hair fashions have been
        broadly correlated with rejection of the postwar patriarchal ‘breadwinner’ and his unappeal-
        ing suited looks and entitlement (Iida, 2005).       
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      113     
                                                             
       4. Patrick Galbraith explores Honda’s many other ideas (Galbraith, 2014: 117–25). Another dis-
         cussion involving Honda can also be found in Miles (2019).
       5. The Kakumeiteki himote dōmei (Revolutionary League of Unwanted Men) is a pun and par-
         ody of the Kakumeiteki kyōsanshugisha dōmei (Revolutionary Communist League), active in
         the late 1960s.                                     
       6. Establishing if a desire for non-heterosexual expression is a part of the emergence of otoko-
         no-ko subculture is beyond the scope of this article and is enormously complicated, not least
         by the historically limited acceptance in postwar Japan of the hegemonic Euro-American con-
         cept of specific sexual orientations (gay/straight) tied to public sexual identities (McLelland,
         2000, 2015; Shimizu, 2007). European ideas about the sartorial expression of identities and
         sexualities do not relate in a direct manner. Secondly, the rapid adaption of the usefully fash-
         ionable new term otoko-no-ko by pornographic producers of some cross-dress and gay porn
         also meant that its meaning became commercialised and came to refer to a wide-umbrella of
         nonbinary and same-sex practising individuals and cross-dressers (josōka and josōko) as well
         as sex industry professionals, previously known by earlier terms, such as new type.
       7. ‘Motenai’ is close in meaning to himote. Both terms are negative derivations of the verb
         moteru: to be desired.                              
       References                                            
       15th Nfs (n.d.) National Fertility Survey 2015 (English version summary). Available at: https://www.
         ipss.go.jp/ps-doukou/e/doukou15/Nfs15R_summary_eng.pdf (accessed 19 July 2025).
       16th Nfs (n.d.) National Fertility Survey 2021 (English version summary). Available at: https://www.
         ipss.go.jp/ps-doukou/e/doukou16/Nfs16R_summary_eng.pdf (accessed 19 July 2025).
       Allison, Anne (1994) Nightwork: Sexuality, Pleasure, and Corporate Masculinity in a Tokyo
         Hostess Club. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Allison, Anne (2013) Precarious Japan. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
       Asahina, Yūki (2021) Precarious regular workers in Japan. Japan Forum 33(4): 633–657.
       Asahi Shinbun Digital Edition (2012) Ikemen-zei de renai kakusa wo zesei [Good-looking tax can
         correct the love inequality]. Asahi Shinbun Digital Edition, 11 December.
       Azuma, Hiroki (2009 [2001 Japanese version]) Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals. Minneapolis,
         MN: University of Minnesota Press.                  
       Basic Survey on Wage Structure Statistical Survey Outline (2022) Chingin kōzō kihon tōkei chōsa
         no gaikyō: reiwa 4 nen. Available at: https://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/itiran/roudou/chingin/
         kouzou/z2023/index.html (accessed 19 July 2025).    
       Bourdieu, Pierre (2008) The Bachelors’ Ball: The Crisis of Peasant Society in Béarn. Cambridge:
         Polity Press.                                       
       Bredikhina, Liudmila (2022) Virtual ‘sweet relationships’ in Japan: Navigating affection through
         technology, communal practices, behaviours, and latent socio-cultural meaning. Comunife
         22: 53–62.                                          
       Chao, Shi-Chen (2017) Queered Kei’ai. In: Lavin, Maud and Yang, Ling (eds) Boys’ Love,
         Cosplay and Androgynous Idols: Queer Fan Cultures in Mainland China, Hong Kong, and
         Taiwan. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 20–44.
       Chiba, Masaya (2018) Imi no nai muimi [Meaningless nonsense]. Tokyo: Kawade Shobō.
       Chiba, Masaya (2019) Heisei no shintai [The Heisei body]. Bungakukai 73(3): 196–206.
       Coles, Tony (2009) Negotiating the field of masculinity: The production and reproduction of mul-
         tiple dominant masculinities. Men and Masculinities 12(1): 30–44.
       Connell, R.W. and Messerschmidt, James (2005) Hegemonic masculinity: Rethinking the concept.
         Gender and Society 19(6): 829–859.                  

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      114                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      Cook, Emma (2019) Power, intimacy, and irregular employment in Japan. In: Alexy, Allison and
        Cook, Emma (eds) Intimate Japan: Ethnographies of Closeness and Conflict. Honolulu:
        University of Hawaii Press, pp. 129–147.             
      Dasgupta, Romit (2013) Re-reading the Salaryman in Japan: Crafting Masculinities. New York:
        Routledge.                                           
      Elias, Ana, Gill, Rosalind and Scharff, Christina (2017) Aesthetic Labour: Beauty Politics in
        Neoliberalism. London: Palgrave Macmillan.           
      Farrer, James and Dale, Sonja (2014) Sexless in Shanghai: Gendered mobility strategies in a trans-
        national sexual field. In: Green, Adam (ed.) Sexual Fields: Towards a Sociology of Collective
        Sexual Life. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 143–169.
      Galbraith, Patrick (2014) Moe Manifesto: The History and Evolution of a Japanese Pop Culture
        Phenomenon. Tokyo: Tuttle Shokai.                    
      Galbraith, Patrick (2019) Otaku and the Struggle for Imagination in Japan. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Gordon, Andrew (2017) New and enduring dual structures of employment in Japan: The rise of
        non-regular labour, 1980s–2010s. Social Science Japan Journal 20(1): 9–36.
      Green, Adam (2014) Sexual Fields: Towards a Sociology of Collective Sexual Life. Chicago, IL:
        University of Chicago Press.                         
      Ho, Michelle (2021) Categories that bind: Transgender, crossdressing, and transnational sexuali-
        ties in Tokyo. Sexualities (Special Issue: Queer Asia) 27(1–2): 94–112.
      Honda, Tōru (2005) Moeru Otoko [Burning Man]. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobō.
      Honda, Tōru (2008) Sekai no Denpa Otoko [World Radio Man]. Tokyo: Sansai Books.
      Iida, Yumiko (2005) Beyond the ‘feminization of masculinity’: Transforming patriarchy with the
        ‘feminine’ in contemporary Japanese youth culture. Inter-Asia Culture Studies 6(1): 56–74.
      Ishida, Mitsunori (2012) Koritsu no shakai [Lonely Society]. Tokyo: Keisō Shobō.
      Itō, Kimio (2018) Hakudatsu(kan) no danseika wo megutte [On the masculinization of [feeling]
        deprived]. Nihon rōdō kenykyū zasshi [Japan Labour Research Journal] (699): 63–76.
      Ito, Midori, Suzuki, Munenori and Nihei, Norihiro, et al. (2010) The individualization of relation-
        ships in Japan. Soziale Welt 61: 217–235.            
      Johnson, Adrienne (2020) Josō or ‘gender free’? Playfully queer ‘lives’ in visual-kei. Asian
        Anthropology 19(2): 119–142.                         
      Josō (2020) ethnography x art film. Dir. Sharon Kinsella with filmmaker David Panos. Hollybush
        Gardens Gallery. Available at: https://vimeo.com/457424012.
      Kaizuma, Keiko (2010) Musume’ kara mite ‘himote’ to misojinii [Himote misogyny viewed from
        the junior feminist perspective]. Bunka Jōhō 177: 140–142.
      Kaplan, Dana and Illouz, Eva (2022) What is Sexual Capital? London: Polity Press.
      Kinsella, Sharon (2013) Schoolgirls, Money and Rebellion in Japan. Abingdon: Routledge.
      Kinsella, Sharon (2019) Cuteness, Josō, and the need to appeal: Otoko-no-ko in male subculture in
        2010s Japan. Japan Forum 32(3): 432–458.             
      Kobayashi, Jun and Kawabata, Kenshi (2019) Henka suru koi to kekkon: Data de yomu heisei
        [Transforming Love and Marriage: Reading the Heisei Period by Statistics]. Tokyo: Shinyōsha.
      Koyano, Atsushi (1999) Motenai Otoko [Unpopular Men]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten.
      McLelland, Mark (2000) Is there a Japanese ‘gay identity’? Culture, Health & Sexuality 2(4):
        459–472.                                             
      McLelland, Mark (2015) ‘How-to sex?’ The contested nature of sexuality in Japan. In: Babb,
        James (ed.) The Sage Handbook of Modern Japanese Studies. London: Sage.
      McRobbie, Garber (1976) Girls and subcultures. In: Hall, Stuart and Jefferson, Tony (eds)
        Resistance Through Rituals: Youth Subcultures in Postwar Britain. London: Hutchinson,
        pp. 177–189.                                         

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kinsella                                      115     
                                                             
       MHLW [Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare] (2018) Heisei 30 nen hataraku josei no jitsujō
         [Actual Conditions of Working Women: Annual Statistical Report]. Available at: https://
         www.mhlw.go.jp/bunya/koyoukintou/josei-jitsujo/dl/18-01.pdf (accessed 19 July 2025).
       MHLW [Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare] (2021) Reiwa 3 nen hataraku josei no jitsujō
         [Actual Conditions of Working Women: Annual Statistical Report]. Available at: https://
         www.mhlw.go.jp/bunya/koyoukintou/josei-jitsujo/21.html (accessed 19 July 2025).
       Miles, Elizabeth (2019) Manhood and the burdens of intimacy. In: Alexy, Allison and Cook,
         Emma (eds) Intimate Japan: Ethnographies of Closeness and Conflict. Honolulu: University
         of Hawaii Press, pp. 148–163.                       
       Miles, Elizabeth (2020) Porn as practice, porn as access: Pornography consumption and a ‘third
         sexual orientation’ in Japan. Porn Studies 7(3): 269–278.
       Miller, Laura (2003) Male beauty work in Japan. In: Suzuki, Nobue and Roberson, James (eds)
         Men and Masculinities in Contemporary Japan. Abingdon: Routledge Press, pp. 37–58.
       Mitadera, Kei (2018) Mujun shakai josetsu [An Introduction to Contradictory Society]. Tokyo:
         Iisuto Press.                                       
       Miura, Atsushi (2009) Himote! dansei junan no jidai [Himote! The Age of Male Ordeal]. Tokyo:
         Bunshun Shinshō.                                    
       Miyadai, Shinji (1998) Sei no jiko kettei genron [The Principle of Sexual Self-determination].
         Tokyo: Kinōkuniya Shōten.                           
       Miyadai, Shinji (2011) Transformation of semantics in the history of Japanese subcultures since
         1992. Mechademia 6: 231–258.                        
       Miyazaki, Ayumi (2023) Hybrid masculinities? Reflexive accounts of Japanese youth at univer-
         sity Josō contests.In: Salenius, Sirpa (ed.) Gender in Japanese Popular Culture: Rethinking
         Masculinities and Femininities. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 123–149.
       Monden, Masafumi (2019) The continuum of male beauty in contemporary Japan. In: Coates,
         Jennifer, Fraser, Lucy and Pendleton, Mark (eds) The Routledge Companion to Gender and
         Japanese Culture. London: Taylor & Francis, pp. 270–278.
       Morinaga, Takuro (1997) Hikon no Susume [A Non-marriage Proposal]. Tokyo: Kōdansha.
       Nagayama, Kaoru (2015) Eromanga Studies. Tokyo: Chikuma Bunsho.
       Niji Voice (2018) Niji Voice 2018 survey on LGBT and working environment. Available at:
         https://nijibridge.jp/wp.content/uploads/2020/11/nijivoice2018.pdf (accessed 25 June 2025).
       Nishii, Kai (2020) Clinical sociological research about life experiences of marginalised men
         involved in the phenomenon of Himote. Gendai no shakai byōri [Modern social pathologies]
         35: 96–113.                                         
       Nishii, Kai (2021) ‘Himote’ kara hajimeru danseigaku [Men’s Studies Starting from ‘Himote’].
         Tokyo: Shūeisha.                                   
       Obinger, Julia (2009) Working on the margins: Japan’s precariat and the working poor. Electronic
         Journal of Contemporary Studies. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
         46576134 Working_on_the_Margins (accessed 25 June 2025).
       Satō, Hiroki, Nagai, Akiko and Miwa, Satoshi (2010) Kekkon no kabe: Hikon bankon no kōzō [The
         MarriageWall: Exploring Late Marriage and Non-marriage]. Tokyo: Keisō Shobō.
       Shimizu, Akiko (2007) Scandalous equivocation: A note on the politics of queer self-naming.
         Inter-Asia Cultural Studies 8(4): 503–516.          
       Simpson, Mark (2013) Metrosexy: A 21st Century Self-Love Story. London: Create Space.
       Slater, David and Galbraith, Patrick (2011) Re-narrating social class and masculinity in neoliberal
         Japan: An examination of the media coverage of the ‘Akihabara Incident’ of 2008 (Article 7
         in 2011). Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies. Available at: https://www.
         japanesestudies.org.uk/articles/2011/SlaterGalbraith.html (accessed 25 June 2025).

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      116                             Theory, Culture & Society 43(2)
                                                             
      Therborn, Göran (2004) Between Sex and Power: Family in the World 1900–2000. Abingdon:
        Routledge.                                           
      Tiqqun (2012) Preliminary Materials for a Theory of the Young-Girl [Semiotext(e) Intervention
        12]. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                       
      Tso, Christopher (2023) The costs of grooming: Bodily scrutiny and white-collar masculinities in
        Japan. Men and Masculinities 27(2): 107–126.         
      Ueno, Chizuko (2009) Himote no misoginii. In: Nihon no misojinii [Misogyny in Japan]. Scripta
        3(4) Summer. Tokyo: Kinokuniya Shotenbu, pp. 34–43.  
      Utterbeck, Liz (2024) Life-course theory and incels: Masculinity strain in the transition to adult-
        hood. Sexuality and Culture 28: 1–15.                
      Welker, James (2020) Queer(ing) Japanese popular culture. Mechademia: Second Arc 13(1): 1–5.
      Yu, Wei-hsin (2012) Better off jobless? Scarring effects of contingent employment in Japan.
        Social Forces 90(3): 735–768.                        
      Zhang, Ge and Hjorth, Larissa (2019) Live-streaming, games and politics of gender performance:
        The case of Nüzhubo in China. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New
        Media Technologies 25(5–6): 807–825.                 
      Sharon Kinsella works on cultural production, media, governance and gendered subculture and
      expression in Japan. Her books include Adult Manga: Culture and Power in Japan (2000) and
      Schoolgirls: Money and Rebellion (2014). She has been researching male cross-dressing in media
      and subcultural resistance in the 2010s and is currently involved in a team book on the cute and
      nonbinary aesthetic which has become central to the politics and shared trans-Asian cultural code
      of online visual culture and social media.             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             