[PAGE 1]
 1347242                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251347242Theory, Culture & SocietyLechte
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       The Scapegoat:  Violence,              2025, Vol. 42(6) 77 –92
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Law  and Origin                                       
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153134477224422
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       John Lechte                                           
       Macquarie University                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Beginning with the current environment of populism, this article considers the scapegoat
       as a general notion and as it appears in the work of René Girard and Sigmund Freud.
       For the latter thinkers, myth, ritual remembrance and current practices in the present,
       as proposed, for example, by Hobbes, form the basis of the method that would expose
       the reality of the violent origin of society, the law and the political. The reliance on
       secondary data means that the origin is only grasped speculatively, not scientifically. The
       article develops the implications of this for an understanding of the status of the law as
       a bulwark against scapegoating. The conclution is that to combat injustice, law must be
       united with a certain transcendence.                  
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       Sigmund Freud, René Girard, law, Emmanuel Levinas, myth, scapegoat, violence
                                                             
                                                             
       We begin with an outline of populism as it is currently encountered because, in the
       past, if not now, it has been closely linked to scapegoating, that is, to the implemen-
       tation of punishment based on prejudice rather than evidence, which is the basis of
       injustice.                                            
        Thus, the third decade of the 21st century has seen the revival of a populism that is
       not only manifest in populist leaders (such as Hungary’s Viktor Orbán) and populist
       movements (such as the French ‘National Rally’ party), but is also manifest in opposi-
       tion to conventional science as witnessed by the ascendancy of the antivax movement,
       conspiracy theories, and appeals to emotion and identity, something that has led various
       commentators (see Newman, 2024) to designate the current era as one of ‘post-truth’. A
                                                             
       Corresponding author: John Lechte. Email: john.lechte@mq.edu.au
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      78                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      key thread of populism, then, sees science, the law and the knowledge of experts as
      being above and therefore against the people1 as the majority – hence the constant refer-
      ences to ‘élites’.                                     
        In the populist mind, law qua law is often viewed with suspicion because, it is claimed,
      law is against the people (especially when enforcing rules of social behaviour). Or again,
      as Coglianese (2020) has argued, populism often makes the law itself a scapegoat for the
      people’s ills. And, for her part, Lacey (2019) has pointed out a feature of populism is
      precisely that it puts the rule of law under pressure. 
        Does the term ‘witch hunt’ thus fit with today’s populist imagination? Here there
      has perhaps been an interesting reversal. Even though the British ‘Witchcraft Act’ of
      1735 (repealed in 1951) made it illegal to accuse someone of witchcraft, populist lead-
      ers, such as Donald Trump, still claim to be the victims of witch hunts. The presidential
      candidate (as he was at the time) thus called the various legal proceedings brought
      against him a ‘witch hunt’. While in the past (e.g. the Salem witch trials of 1692–3)
      conspiratorial fantasies were called ‘truth’, now, hard evidence is often characterized
      as prejudice or fantasy, that is, as ‘evidence’ of a witch hunt. Nevertheless, it has also
      been pointed out that                                  
        real witch hunts are occurring under the veil of newly enacted laws and lawsuits targeting
        women, communities of color, and the LGBTQ community. Often, the arguments supporting
        this legislation and litigation are not based on science or verifiable data; rather, they are based
        on ‘spectral evidence,’ meant to stir fear and drum up rage. (Sherwin, 2023: 3)
      In other words, the law has seemingly failed to fulfill what many would see as its mission
      to stem injustice.                                     
        Muller (2021), relying on René Girard’s work, has pointed to the strong connection
      between populism and scapegoating. In particular, populism turns the ‘outsider’ (the
      migrant, the stranger, the one who is different) into a scapegoat. Hence, the targeting of
      Mexican immigrants in Donald Trump’s 2016 and 2024 rally speeches.
        The idea of a scapegoat as an arbitrarily chosen, thus innocent, victim is then, from
      the perspective of Western judicial institutions, the height of injustice.2 In a perspective
      broader than can be addressed in this article the question arises as to just how successful
      has been the law – pillar of the said institutions – in preventing injustice in general and
      injustice as regards the scapegoat in particular? The answer is that without a vision of the
      good – of ‘right’ – as its basis, the law – especially statutory law – has often failed when
      and where it was most needed.                          
        For his part, Girard (1979, 1989) takes us to the fate of the scapegoat in, as he says,
      ‘archaic’ societies. Here, a victim is encountered, one arbitrarily chosen (therefore a ‘sur-
      rogate’) for sacrifice, ostensibly so that violence can be brought under control. ‘Arbitrarily
      chosen’: who today does not wince at the injustice evoked by this phrase? Modern soci-
      ety, Girard tells us, has, for its part, erected ‘judicial institutions’ with the exact purpose
      of only convicting those who are proven to be guilty ‘beyond reasonable doubt’. In other
      words, the law is supposed to protect the innocent. Has it always done so? Does it suc-
      ceed in the present in doing so? A response to these questions must be ‘no’; for, indeed,
      there are and have been bad laws.                      
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         79     
                                                             
        Can the origin of the term ‘scapegoat’ illuminate the law’s actual status and function-
       ing? As already noted, the main purpose of the scapegoat mechanism is to prevent vio-
       lence, or to end violence. For, according to Girard, as contagious, the latter threatens the
       very existence of society or any communal grouping. However, a less straightforward
       picture emerges if one acknowledges both the Old Testament depiction of the scapegoat
       and its status in arenas such as that of ancient Greece. In the latter domain, calamitous
       droughts, famines and plagues prompted the selection of what today would be called a
       scapegoat. Thus, in a study of scapegoating in ancient Greece, Jan Bremmer (1983: 301)
       reports that: ‘In Leukas a criminal was cast off a rock into the sea for the sake of averting
       evil during a festival of Apollo.’                    
        To turn to the Judaeo-Christian context, it is well known that the figure of a goat that
       becomes a scapegoat appears in Leviticus 16:10, which reads: ‘But the goat, on which
       the lot fell to be the scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the Lord, to make an atone-
       ment with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderness.’
        What interests us here is the scapegoat’s role as medium. Thus: ‘The goat shall bear
       all the [children of Israel’s] iniquities upon him to a solitary land and he shall let the goat
       go into the wilderness’ (cited in Douglas, 1995: 7). For Douglas, the idea of a figure that
       is not itself responsible for iniquity but becomes the bearer of the other’s wickedness
       gives rise to the notion of substitution as captured in the popular terms ‘whipping boy’,
       ‘fall guy’, ‘dupe’, ‘setup’ (p. 10).                  
        The goat, then, becomes the medium through which a community might purge itself
       of its sins. Apparently, rituals like the Azazel (the Jewish name for the ceremony of
       releasing the scapegoat into the wilderness) were widespread in the ancient world
       (Rashkow, 2023: 88). And, indeed, Girard finds a situation analogous to that of the
       Azazel in Christ’s encounter with the man from Gerasa possessed by demons. The
       demons beg to be cast out into a herd of pigs, and Jesus agrees to this request. One pig,
       then the rest, rush over a cliff and are drowned, thereby confirming, according to Girard,
       the mimeticism thesis,3 or the principle of ‘the crowd mentality’ (1989: 185). As will be
       revealed shortly, for Serres (2015 [1982]) the scapegoat as medium becomes the arbi-
       trary, third element, or the ‘excluded middle’.       
        Moreover, as medium, the scapegoat shares features with Serres’s conception of the
       parasite. Girard’s emphasis on the arbitrary status of the surrogate victim thus implies
       that the scapegoat too is a medium, if not an entity of parasitic complexion.
        While Girard refers to Leviticus in passing (1987: 33), his key terms – ‘scapegoat’,
       ‘surrogate victim’ and ‘stereotypes of persecution’ – are not explicitly related to the
       biblical rendition. Instead of debating the meaning of the term, Girard shifts the focus
       onto the nature of events that have a scapegoat component – the first of these being the
       sacrifice – the ‘crime’ – that gives birth to society and, in Freud’s version, of the primal
       horde where the sons, in killing the father, give birth to the law (see Freud, 2001: 141–
       6). Sacrifice and the sacred is thus the key theme of Girard’s highly influential Violence
       and the Sacred (1979), while ‘stereotypes of persecution’ is the dominant theme of his
       book The Scapegoat (1989).                            
        ‘The function of sacrifice’, Girard argues, ‘not only allows for but requires a surrogate
       victim – in other words, violent unanimity. In ritual sacrifice the victim, when actually
       put to death, diverts violence from its forbidden objectives within the community’ (1979:

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      80                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      101, emphasis added).4 The victim, arbitrarily chosen, is thus, in a modern legal sense,
      ‘innocent’, the putative aim of the law being to protect the innocent and to convict only
      those who are proven guilty ‘beyond reasonable doubt’. 
        Of course, one hardly needs to be remined that the law has often been manipulated to
      convict the innocent. Before Auschwitz there was, in 1894, the notorious Dreyfus Affair
      in France where a Jew, Alfred Dreyfus, an artillery officer in the French army, was twice
      convicted of treason based on fabricated evidence. Dreyfus, then, was a modern-day
      scapegoat, a person persecuted in a climate of vicious antisemitism.5
        Even though the law was corrupted, the difference with Girard’s characterization of
      the ‘original’ sacrifice is that the persecution of Dreyfus was not unanimous, due in good
      measure (it might be supposed) to the presence in French society of the idea of the law
      as the incarnation of justice. Zola, in ‘J’Accuse’, thus refers to Dreyfus’s convictions as
      a ‘miscarriage of justice’ and saw his entreaty to the President of the Republic as a ‘cry
      for justice’ (see Zola, 1898). Girard’s comment is pertinent here: ‘sometimes the perse-
      cutors choose their victims because they belong to a class that is particularly susceptible
      to persecution rather than because of any crimes they have committed’ (1989: 17). Thus,
      during the plague in northern France from 1349 to 1350, ‘Jews were massacred at the
      mere mention of the plague being in the area, even before it had actually arrived’ (p. 3).
        For Girard, and those who follow him, the scapegoat mechanism – where ‘all against
      one’ brings a return to order – explains the origin of society, an origin that is essentially
      religious in nature. But within the scope of modern law, sacrificial violence is ‘unjust,
      illegal, and illegitimate’ (1989: 23).                 
        Viewed more generally, the question arising is: what is the nature, or origin, of the law
      – what, ultimately, is the law’s raison d’être? In response, let us say that the law, as rational
      and dedicated to revealing what is essential, is opposed to the arbitrary basis of sacrifice.
        A full response to this question must remain for another time. In what follows, we will
      see that the scapegoat mechanism is present in notions of the political and that the law,
      the political and society are coloured by the assumption of violence at the origin.
        Further illumination of scapegoating and injustice is provided by the situations of the
      slave, the foreigner and the refugee. The theme is discussed by Émile Benveniste in Le
      Vocabulaire des institutions indo-européennes (Benveniste, 1969). As Benveniste shows,
      not only are ‘slave’ and ‘scapegoat’ interchangeable, but a slave is frequently a foreigner,
      as slaves were in many domains predominantly prisoners of war from foreign lands and
      could be bought and sold. On the other hand, foreigners come under the auspices of the
      rules of hospitality – rules aimed at reducing, if not preventing, hostility between groups
      and individuals.                                       
        Of equal significance is the derivation of the word ‘slave’ from ‘slav’ and from
      wealh, meaning ‘the Celt’ (cf. Old English term; Benveniste, 1969: 360), Celts being,
      says the linguist, ‘a subjugated people’ (p. 360).6 To bring ‘slave’ and ‘foreigner’ into
      the picture considerably broadens the scapegoat perspective. Moreover, the image of a
      subjected people puts the scapegoat theme in contact with Arendt’s (1968a: 121–3)
      Totalitarianism and the concept of an ‘objective opposition’ or enemy under totalitarian
      government, compared to a ‘hostile opposition’ or enemy. The former refers to an oppo-
      sition that is designated as dangerous to society, even though no actual hostile act or
      crime has been committed. Examples given by Arendt are the bourgeoisie under
      Stalinism and the Jews under Nazism.7                  

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         81     
                                                             
        Carl Schmitt’s theory (see Schmitt, 2007) of the friend-enemy opposition as the
       essence of the political inevitably leads to a privileging of the ‘objective’ enemy, an
       enemy designated as such without any hostile act being committed.8 The ‘objective’
       enemy – the enemy innocent of any specific hostile act here and now – would conform
       precisely with the scapegoat, to the extent that this enemy is arbitrarily designated.
       Therefore, if Schmitt’s argument that the ‘friend-enemy’ dichotomy as the essence of the
       political were valid, it would imply that the scapegoat mechanism is at the heart of the
       political – that the political is at least partly, if not wholly, totalitarian. What needs to be
       discussed when dealing with Schmitt is whether, in his theory, an enemy is always
       needed, something which suggests that the enemy could well be anyone, or any group.
        Indeed, Schmitt, in one definition of the enemy, defines it as ‘the other, the stranger;
       and [he continues] it is sufficient for his nature that he is, in a specially intense way,
       existentially something different and alien so that in the extreme case conflicts with him
       are possible’ (1985: 27). We have already seen that there is a close link between the other
       (the migrant, the outsider, one who is different) and the scapegoat. Schmitt thus rein-
       forces this link.                                     
        Again, in another passage, the claim is that for the political to hold, a decision must
       be made regarding the friend-enemy dichotomy:         
        as long as a people exists in the political sphere, this people must, even if only in the most
        extreme case [. . .] determine by itself the distinction of friend and enemy. Therein resides the
        essence of its political existence. When it no longer possesses the capacity or the will to make
        this distinction, it ceases to exist politically. (1985: 49, emphasis added)
       Although the term ‘existential’ is used by Schmitt on a number of occasions to refer to
       the enemy, thus suggesting a real and actual threat, the whole idea of an a priori concept
       of the political as the friend-enemy dichotomy and the decision-making just cited, miti-
       gates against any notion of the primacy of the existential.9
                               *                             
       Inspired by Girard’s notion of the scapegoat (and thereby indicating the scope of the
       influence of Girard’s scapegoat theory), Michel Serres, in his book Rome (2015), aligns
       the scapegoat with the ‘third’ or excluded middle. The scapegoat is also the ‘third’ as
       medium, as is depicted in Leviticus. But an adherence to Girard’s theory means that – for
       Serres, too – violence is at the origin: Romulus, after all, killed Remus – a point that
       Serres does not tire of repeating: ‘The culture founded on death only returns to death,
       repetitively. The knowledge founded on murder returns to murder multiplied by knowl-
       edge’ (2015: 91). Moreover:                           
        The hatred between twins grows like ivy in the group; it goes towards extinction, and there is
        no foundation unless, stopping the reciprocal throat-slitting, the crowd turns against one among
        them. René Girard’s lesson, the schema he has proposed, makes these two contradictory stories
        compatible; it even makes them complementary. (2015: 91)
       Here, Serres tells us, with reference to the ‘excluded middle’, that we are in touch with
       the anthropological explanation of society: ‘The excluded middle or third is the scape-
       goat: the scapegoat is the foundation of anthropology, the excluded middle is the
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      82                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      foundation of our logic. They bear the same name’ (2015: 126). In keeping with Serres’s
      overall project to show that the abstract and the concrete are always two faces of the
      same figure, the scapegoat is the concrete incarnation of the logical principle. Thus:
        What is this logic? What is this logic whose genealogy we have just traced? This logic, this
        principle, this pure form of the excluded middle is not so pure or so formal. This principle, in
        the principle, beyond ontology, beyond classical theology, goes back to mythology, to the
        anthropology of sacrifice. (2015: 141)               
                                                             
      However, if it is claimed that: ‘In the beginning therefore is violence’ (p. 136) – the vio-
      lence of sacrifice – how can it sustain the abstract excluded middle, the principle of non-
      violence, as it were?                                  
        On first blush, this does not seem plausible. However, once the excluded middle is
      equated with the ‘excluded third’, as this is defined in Serres’s theory of the parasite, a
      different picture emerges, as the following passage reveals: ‘Who is the third? Someone,
      anyone. The noise stops; someone leaves. Someone, anyone: both formal and random’
      (Serres, 1982: 55). Here, the comparison of the parasite with the surrogate victim would
      seem to be justified, for Girard claims that, ‘anybody can play the part of surrogate vic-
      tim [. . . ] The crucial fact being that the choice of the victim is arbitrary’ (1979: 257).
        Despite the conceptual nature of the ‘excluded third’, Serres, like the anthropologist,
      tarries with the sacred and violence at the origin – at the origin of society and culture and,
      thus, of the political. The origin here is one of pure immanence. It is also the violence that
      for so many commentators would give rise to the law. Were there no violence, there
      would be no law.                                       
        Let us summarize this situation before continuing our analysis: while the scapegoat
      introduces the arbitrary, the random, the innocent surrogate victim, the third, the parasiti-
      cal, law, as justice, aims to reveal: the essential, the deliberate, the rational, the guilty, the
      factual, the true. Of course, bad laws have sullied the notion of the law as justice and
      have no doubt encouraged negative critiques. The underlying questions in what follows
      are: does it make sense to investigate the origin of law and the political? Or is the very
      notion of an immanent (materialist) origin part of the problem? My point is that the latter
      is very much the case. The reason for going into detail concerning what I will call ‘imma-
      nentism’ is to highlight the predominance of its purely speculative underpinning – such
      as the origin of the political as couched in the myth of the state of nature, or the idea of
      human nature as inherently violent.                    
                               *                             
      Of course, in current parlance (the parlance of the ‘plane of immanence’), the binary
      opposite of immanence is transcendence. But my claim, inspired by Levinas, is that the
      relation between immanence and transcendence is not symmetrical. This entails that tran-
      scendence is not to be understood in idealist terms (which allows it to become an object
      of thought), even though it could be conceded that it is an ‘idea’ that ‘comes to mind’.
      Transcendence is beyond immanence and thus cannot be translated into its terms, even if
      the material basis of reality is not to be denied. Justice, then, is not the simple opposite
      of injustice, but is beyond the terms and reality of injustice (scapegoating). If law is
      connected to transcendence, it is in the sense that its foundation is transcendent – that is,
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         83     
                                                             
       beyond law as encountered in the world, as, for example, in the history of law. This, then,
       is what law as doit, as Recht, as diritto, etc., alludes to.
                               *                             
       Consequently, in light of the foregoing, a thorough examination of the law and the politi-
       cal conceived as immanence and as the other of transcendence offers us an insight (albeit
       indirect) into justice as transcendence as inspired by Levinas’s philosophy of ethics as
       transcendence, a philosophy that indeed may well have the measure of the putative domi-
       nance of the origin of the political as exemplifying immanence. The thesis is that politics,
       if not the political, posited as essentially founded in violence and conflict – in war – is
       the domain of immanence and the negative, if not of evil. This implies that ethics and the
       law as ‘right’ must remain separated from politics and the political. An ethics inspired by
       Levinas is about conflict and violence, if not transcended, then bypassed.10
        Hence, not only is war essentially opposed to ethics, but the political – thus, politics
       – is war (von Clausewitz was right!) or conflict at the highest level. Being, totality – the
       ontological – freedom, as essential immanence, harbour the political. Consequently,
       Levinas states in Totality and Infinity (Levinas, 2012) that: ‘Heideggerian ontology
       affirms the primacy of freedom over ethics’ (p. 45)   
        With Hobbes, says Levinas, one cannot ‘set a limit on the state’ (p. 93). Nevertheless,
       ‘one cannot say that there is no legitimate violence’ (p. 93). Consequently, the term
       ‘scapegoat’ can signify the injustice of innocent individuals being treated as guilty. If the
       scapegoat can only be defined as such in relation to law, a critique of the law is called for.
       There is a transfer of guilt onto the innocent – but innocent in relation to what? Just as
       there is no crime without law, so the scapegoat is only visible in relation to law.
       Girard’s Scapegoat and the Method of Myth             
       Reference to the ‘purely speculative’ above prompts an examination of Girard’s method
       of myth. The concern of this section, then, is to introduce a hiatus. For while the main
       focus in the previous section was on the relation of the scapegoat to law and justice, this
       is not Girard’s key concern. On the contrary, for Girard and, I would say, for a majority
       of thinkers in this field, the central issue is the origin of society, the political and the law,
       an origin steeped in violence, in murder – in a crime. The scapegoat becomes, in a certain
       sense, ‘proof’ of violence at the origin. Such is the way that the predominance of imma-
       nence and finitude is reinforced in an explanation of law and society and, at the same
       time, the connection between law and justice is rendered problematic. Consequently, the
       primacy of violence in explanations of law, society and the political, and the method
       involved in establishing this, must be challenged. For if violence at the origin is assumed
       – if immanence is privileged – then law, as the supposed bulwark against violence, is also
       steeped in immanence and, consequently, iniquitous laws are forever a possibility.
        It is, then, impossible to grasp the deeper sense of ‘scapegoat’ and of ‘violence’ for
       Girard without also becoming conversant with his method. The latter, as will become
       apparent, enables our theorist to link the scapegoat with the sacred and thus with vio-
       lence at the origin of society. In short, more than an exemplar of justice or injustice, the
       scapegoat – as we saw earlier in Serres’s summation – is evidence that society is founded
       on sacrifice as the killing of a scapegoat. Already, we have seen that Serres concedes this
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      84                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      point. And Freud’s presentation of the primal horde and ‘collective murder’ is invoked
      by Girard to confirm the thesis of original violence, even if he rejects key aspects of
      Freud’s psychoanalytic framework, such as the theory of the unconscious.
        In the opening paragraph of his collection of essays on the notion of the scapegoat, Girard
      offers an observation of considerable methodological importance, namely: ‘a series of cata-
      strophic events’ as recounted in the opening of the Judgment of the King of Navarre, a work
      of the 14th century by the French poet Guillaume de Machaut (1300–77), which raises the
      question of the truth of the account. Crucially, Girard remarks that, ‘the account leaves the
      impression that something must actually have happened’ (1989: 1). Here, it is ‘the account’
      – later, it will be ‘the myth’ that will, the author proposes, leave a strong impression on the
      reader that something must have happened. Actual empirical evidence of the events them-
      selves may not be available, but the impact of these events, as gained through secondary
      material such as poetry and myth, is, for Girard, fully available. In effect, Girard proceeds as
      though the consequent affirms the precedent: If A then B; B therefore A. Or rather, we
      should say, simply: B therefore A because A has not been encountered in any historical
      sense.11 For Girard, there was an original murder that gave rise to the sacrifice of the scape-
      goat. But evidence of this only exists in Girard’s presentation through the interpretation of
      various myths, the argument being that if the violent events evoked in myths did not occur
      there would be no myths. The existence of myths in the present thus confirms, it is claimed,
      ‘that something must actually have happened’. It is important to keep in mind the method set
      out here as we proceed to a more detailed interpretation of the inquiries into the scapegoat
      mechanism in Girard’s book The Scapegoat (1989).       
      The Scapegoat and Secondary Sources                    
      The status of Girard’s claim to be rigorous and scientific is now at issue. Myths, accord-
      ing to our theorist, never refer directly to an original murder, nor, indeed, do they provide
      direct evidence of collective murder even if, in fact, they have their roots in real persecu-
      tions. Myths tell the story from the persecutor’s perspective. Persecutors endeavour to
      conceal the fact of collective murder – that is, the killing of scapegoats. Thus, the ‘golden
      rule of persecution texts’ is that: ‘the mind of a persecutor creates a certain type of illu-
      sion and the traces of this illusion confirm rather than invalidate the existence of a certain
      kind of event, the persecution itself in which the witch is put to death’ (Girard, 1989: 11).
      The very existence of persecution myths entails that ‘a real victim lies behind the text’ (p.
      26), and yet myth at the same time aims – as has been said – to conceal this reality. The
      latter involves the sacred and the sacred involves a victim, the scapegoat:
        The victim is a scapegoat. Everyone has a clear understanding of this expression; no one has
        any hesitation about its meaning. Scapegoat indicates both the innocence of the victims, the
        collective polarization in opposition to them, and the collective end result of that polarization.
        (1989: 39)                                           
      Ultimately, Girard maintains, ‘[t]he foundation and structure of every community is based
      on violence that is and should have remained destructive at its very essence, but by some
      miracle the community has been able to ward off this violence’ (p. 94). Here, to reiterate,
      violence at the origin means the privileging of immanence over transcendence.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         85     
                                                             
        However, the meaning of ‘scapegoat’ and ‘victim’ that Girard and others assume is
       self-evident is in fact based on a number of implicit factors. First, as Girard’s commen-
       tary on myths reveals, persecutors never recognize the persecuted as scapegoats. To do
       so would be to acknowledge the innocence of those persecuted. For the persecutors, the
       persecuted are guilty. Thus, Brian Leiter observes that in a pre-modern era:
        The adulterer became the victim of the wrath of the community ravaged by disease, since the
        community wrongly believed the adultery caused the harm to the community as a whole. So
        harmed, that adulterer [sic] simply became another seething cauldron of ressentiment looking
        for a target for its distress (perhaps the community as a whole, perhaps the religious leader who
        led the community to make him the target of its anger). (Leiter, 2019: 86)
       Consequently, a scapegoat exists so long as the persecutors believe in the guilt of the
       persecuted victim.                                    
        In the modern era, a post-enlightenment concept of law aims to adjudicate between
       guilt and innocence. This is implicitly recognized by Girard when he proclaims that
       Christ’s passion reveals the truth that sacrificial societies of the past have engaged in the
       collective murder of scapegoats. Thus: ‘The passion reveals the scapegoat mechanism,
       i.e., that which should remain invisible if these forces are to maintain themselves’ (1989:
       166). The aim is ‘to put an end to humanity’s imprisonment in the system of mythologi-
       cal representation based on the false transcendence of a victim who is made sacred
       because of the unanimous verdict of guilt’ (p. 166).  
        At the present time, the principle that supposedly prevents scapegoating is the law,
       hence the importance of having ‘good’ laws. Bad laws attribute guilt where there is inno-
       cence and innocence where there is guilt. The experience of National Socialism is a
       prime exemplar of this.                               
        The secular law in Anglo-European culture has been the harbinger of what counts as
       guilt and innocence. This is why so much hinges on the proclamation of good laws. If a
       bad law – such as Nazi laws persecuting the Jews – gives rise to the scapegoat (persecu-
       tion of the innocent), how is it that the persecutory status of the law becomes evident if
       not through reference to a higher law? Is this the law of ethics of which Levinas speaks?
       An upshot amongst others is that to speak of law in general is misleading. For there is
       no law in itself – at least not in a secular context; there are only particular laws. Thus,
       as concerns the scapegoat victim it makes no sense to invoke the law in general as the
       harbinger of innocence and guilt. In the legal/jurisprudential philosophy literature, the
       content of the law, quite evidently, is not up for discussion. Rather, the issues debated
       have to do with how laws are implemented and whether, in relation to existing laws, the
       presumption of innocence and other safeguards for those accused have been imple-
       mented. To be argued in this study is that innocence and guilt only make sense and are
       of crucial importance when considered in relation to the content of laws.
       Speculation and Innocence/Violence at the Origin      
       Highlighted thus far is Girard’s method, where myth, poetry and other secondary materi-
       als are taken as evidence of an original event. It is necessary now to elaborate on this
       theme, for it constitutes an influential and widespread mode of thought ultimately based
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      86                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      on speculation. While, on the one hand, scapegoating prompts a sense of injustice, on the
      other hand, Girard’s ‘method’ reveals a certain flight of fancy. The positing of an original
      state of nature is one version of this. But it is also manifest within a genre of thought that
      animates ‘violence and the sacred’. The latter concerns the very origin of social and cul-
      tural life as inextricably linked to violence and – in the case of Girard’s work – to the
      surrogate victim (that is, to the scapegoat).          
        Earlier, we noted that, for Girard, there was an original murder. According to him,
      this is known because tragedy, for example, ‘is a tendentious reenactment, a mythic
      inversion of an event that actually took place’ (Girard, 1979: 203, emphasis added).
      Moreover, the ‘act of violence performed in the course of a rite or a festival points the
      way clearly enough, for it hinges on sacrificial practices or on ‘“totemic” ceremonies’
      (p. 221). Again: ‘Even today, legitimized sexuality in the West reveals traces of its
      sacrificial character’ (p. 220). In other words, and to reiterate, even though primary
      evidence from the time of the actual murder does not exist, there are, in the present,
      many cultural practices, myths and other artifacts – that is, secondary or indirect evi-
      dence – that are deemed to confirm the event’s actual occurrence. While it would
      seem reasonable to place the violent and sacred origin of society and culture within
      the purview of prehistory – which is based on primary documentation – Girard places
      the origin in history. Girard thus summarizes his position in which the origin is his-
      torical as follows:                                    
        My theory depends on a number of basic premises. Even if innumerable intermediary stages
        exist between the spontaneous outbursts of violence and its religious institutions, even if it is
        only these imitations that come to our notice, I want to stress that these imitations had their
        origin in a real event. The actuality of this event, over and above its existence in rite and record,
        must be kept in mind. We must also take care not to restrict this event to any one context, any
        one dominant intellectual framework, whether semantic or symbolic, which lacks a firm basis
        in reality. The event should be viewed as an absolute beginning, signifying the passage from
        nonhuman to human as well as a relative beginning for the societies in question. (Girard, 1979:
        309, emphasis added)                                 
        Previously, we saw that myths provide Girard with evidence that the scapegoat mech-
      anism (collective murder) is at the origin of society. Again, secondary evidence is thus
      called upon to validate the thesis that murder constitutes the origin of social life.
        Hobbes, too, calls upon secondary evidence to confirm his assertion that the state of
      nature did exist. Thus, in a key passage in the Leviathan its author claims that certain
      signs and practices in present-day society imply that the state of nature was a reality.
      Those who deny this are called upon to explain why a person acts in the following way:
        when taking a journey, he arms himself, and seeks to go well accompanied; when going to
        sleep, he locks his doors; when even in his house, he locks his chests; and this when he knows
        there are laws, and public officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall be done him; what
        opinion he has of his fellow subjects, when he rides armed; of his fellow citizens, when he locks
        his doors; and of his children, and servants, when he locks his chests. Does he not there as much
        accuse mankind by his actions as I do by my words? (1971: 100–1)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         87     
                                                             
       Hobbes’s method is thereby revealed. Despite the absence of primary evidence (evidence
       of palaeontology, for example) confirming the existence of the state of nature as a state
       of war, secondary evidence is invoked to prove the point. As with Hobbes so with Girard,
       secondary takes precedence over primary evidence: deduction is thus privileged over
       induction, and history over prehistory.               
        Freud’s theory, in Totem and Taboo (2001), of an original murder also comes within
       the purview of the genre of thought in question. Thus, the killing of the father in the
       primal horde is deemed to have given rise to society, culture and civilization. Because it
       focuses on an original murder, Freud’s thesis attracts Girard even if, as we have noted, he
       also takes issue with its psychoanalytical orientation.
        For his part, Schey (2013), in his insightful interpretation of Freud on the primal
       horde and the killing of the father, begins to outline, not only what is wrong with Freud’s
       thesis, but also what is wrong with a genre of thought that relies on the kind of secondary
       evidence – what Schey designates as ‘ritual remembrance’ – that both Freud and Girard
       invoke.                                               
        If we put to one side the argument about whether or not Freud succeeds in making the
       myth of the primal horde the origin of the Oedipus complex, the points of interest in
       Schey’s analysis concern, firstly, Freud’s attempt to posit an original murder as the ori-
       gin, and, secondly, whether ritual remembrance of the original murder can be realised
       given that the repetitions that ritual remembrance entails distort the evidence. If ritual
       remembrance leads to distortions, how can it assume the status of evidence in the present
       of the original murder? The following passage from Freud’s text quoted by Schey is thus
       significant:                                          
        Totemic religion not only comprised expressions of remorse and attempts at atonement, it also
        served as a remembrance of the triumph over the father [...] Thus it became a duty to repeat
        the crime of parricide again and again in the sacrifice of the totem animal, whenever, as a
        result of the changing conditions of life, the cherished fruit of the crime – appropriation of the
        paternal attributes – threatened to disappear. (Freud, 2001: 145; cited by Schey, 2013: 111)
       What this passage shows is that, at the level of method, the approaches of Freud and Girard
       converge: they both call upon forms of ritual remembrance (which includes festivals and
       myths as well as various other repeated rituals, such as those to do with fertility) as evi-
       dence of the original event – the murder of the father for Freud and the murder of the sur-
       rogate victim, or scapegoat, for Girard.12 Could one not go further and say that, pushed to
       its limit, the method implies that the mode of existence of present-day society is evidence
       of the historical past? To interpret culture would thus be equivalent to revealing the events
       of the past. Paradoxically, the present would be the key to a knowledge of the past, rather
       than the reverse, and deduction would dominate over induction. Schey, quite predictably,
       does not go so far in this line of thought. What he does show, however, is that the whole
       enterprise of invoking secondary evidence in the present is problematic, to the point where
       it becomes clear that the effort to reveal the origin by such means is impossible:
        As Freud’s text demonstrates, however, understanding totemic ritual as an archival technique
        does not explain the primal murder or the origin of totemism. Instead, it demonstrates why such
        an explanation is impossible, for the archival process Freud describes repetitiously re-creates
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      88                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
        and re-erases collective memory across time. Freud’s unconvincing oedipal explanation of the
        murder is therefore not simply aberrant; rather, this explanation draws attention to the aberrancy
        inherent in any attempt to explain the origin of history and civilization. What Totem and Taboo
        thematizes is the impossibility of truly knowing such an origin. (Schey, 2013: 112)
      In the broadest terms, at issue is whether or not researchers engaged in establishing the
      origin of society and culture assume what they set out to prove. As Schey confirms, ritual
      remembrance entails distortions: ‘For the entire history the primal murder puts into place
      explicitly concerns a form of historical transmission in which a collective memory of this
      act is continually distorted through the habitual repetition of remembrance rituals’
      (Schey, 2013: 112). Moreover, ‘each ritual repetition is shown to simultaneously erase
      and refigure the previous understanding of the murder’ (p. 113).
        If ritual remembrance entails distortions, how is it possible to prove that that society
      derives from a violent origin? If this is not assumed, however, is there any basis for the
      status of the scapegoat as the quintessential embodiment of injustice? The answer is that
      there is no need to refer back to an original murder to make the case. Nietzsche on guilt
      showed, for example, that events in recent history, such as witch trials, are sufficient to
      confirm what it is that constitutes scapegoating.      
      Conflict – Violence – and the Origin of the Political  
                                                             
      Engagement with Girard’s thesis leads us to appreciate just how widespread is the idea
      of the origin of the political as an original violence. In effect, if the human were not that
      being who was and potentially is inexorably engaged in violent conflict, there would be
      no political sphere.                                   
        Thus, in his analysis of ‘agonistic democracy – of democracy understood as starting
      with “kratos”’ (Vardoulakis, 2017: 703), Dimitris Vardoulakis points to the primacy of
      violence or conflict at the origin of the political, if not of society as a whole. Thus, our
      author writes that: ‘This scheme means effectively the substitution of discord with con-
      cord as the basis of the political’ (p. 706). Although Vardoulakis is concerned with a full
      elaboration of the term ‘stasis’, he does not fail to note in passing ‘the primacy of conflict
      or discord – of stasis – for the political. Democracy signifies that regime of power for
      which conflict is primary’ (p. 720, emphasis added). In other words: ‘the primary term in
      the compound word “democracy” is kratos [power, force]. We can speak here of an ago-
      nistic democracy’ (p. 720.).                           
        Where is it not declared or silently assumed that there would be no political without
      the assumption of the impossibility of eradicating conflict (violence) from human society
      and culture? So, the origin of the political is conflict/violence/war/polemos. The politi-
      cal, however, is but one aspect of the culture called ‘Western’. What of philosophy?
      Here, we know that the origin of Western philosophy is not just historical; for the origin
      of philosophy turns on the philosophy of the origin. It is not only a matter of determining
      which material tradition of philosophy is the most pertinent, as Heidegger attempted to
      do.13 Rather, the issue centres on the relation between transcendence and immanence.
      The latter is in the ascendency when an historical approach is taken to the nature of phi-
      losophy. By contrast, transcendence is in the ascendency when the focus is on the nature
      of thought itself.                                     
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         89     
                                                             
        Our investigation into the scapegoat has, however, revealed the dominance of the
       origin as violence – thus, the dominance of immanence in explaining the nature of soci-
       ety and culture. At the same time, we have seen that knowledge of – or is it belief in? –
       the violent origin derives exclusively from what has been called ‘secondary’ evidence of
       remembrance – evidence as ritual, prohibition, festival and myth. As has been said, this
       implies that the past does not explain the present; rather, the present explains, or opens
       up, a knowledge of the past. What is truly striking here is the widespread acceptance of
       this, namely, that there was a crime at the origin even though there is no direct proof
       thereof.                                              
        Does Giorgio Agamben’s theory of homo sacer not follow a similar path? The answer
       is ‘yes’ if we refer to Agamben’s invocation of paradigm rather than history. In effect, the
       paradigm of sovereignty becomes the secondary evidence that would indicate – as I have
       shown elsewhere (Lechte, 2023a: 88–92) – that it is as if the existence of homo sacer as
       the one who can be killed without this being murder or sacrifice is the basis of
       sovereignty.                                          
        Moreover, contemporary sovereignty as manifest in the figure of the sovereign entity
       becomes a remnant of the Hobbesian ‘state of nature’: ‘in Hobbes’, Agamben claims,
       ‘the state of nature survives in the person of the sovereign’ (Agamben, 1998: 35). As
       such, the sovereign is the secondary evidence of the prior existence of the state of nature.
       Or rather, it is as if the sovereign were the evidence of the prior existence of the state of
       nature.                                               
        Like Girard, Agamben invokes the secondary evidence of Carnival to argue that law
       and anomie are inseparable. Carnival is the overturning of law for a time. Law, so it is
       claimed, needs anomie to be the law that it is. Thus, 
        [d]uring these feasts [of Carnival] (which are found with similar characteristics in various
        epochs and cultures), men dress up and behave like animals, masters serve their slaves, males
        and females exchange roles, and criminal behavior is considered licit or, in any case, not
        punishable. That is, they inaugurate a period of anomie that breaks and temporarily subverts the
        social order. (Agamben, 2005: 71, emphasis added)    
        Here, Agamben is attracted to studies by the Swiss ethnologist Karl Meuli, and the
       latter’s interpretation of various ‘charivari’ (popular punishment rituals) as being the
       basis of law. Thus, Agamben observes: ‘If Meuli’s hypothesis is correct, the “legal anar-
       chy” of the anomic feasts does not refer back to ancient agrarian rites, which in them-
       selves explain nothing; rather, it brings to light in a parodic form the anomie within the
       law, the state of emergency as the drive contained in the very heart of the nomos’
       (Agamben, 2005: 72).                                  
       To Conclude                                           
       The logic of sacrifice – or, as Serres proposes, of the excluded middle or third – is a logic
       of the arbitrary. With regard to the scapegoat there is no reason as to why one person is
       chosen over another, the point being that someone is chosen. In principle, the law – in its
       transcendent foundation as doit, Recht, etc. – opposes the arbitrariness of scapegoat
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      90                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      logic. The transcendence of law would be the law beyond law as immanence – the law
      that participates in a transcendence that is more, as has been proposed, than simply the
      symmetrical other of immanence.                        
        It is true, however, that there have been bad – read: iniquitous – laws. A positivist,
      such as H.L.A. Hart, has said that an iniquitous law is still law. But if law only truly
      exists as the incarnation of justice, objectivity and reason, would it not be the case that
      iniquitous laws are in fact pseudo laws and not law as such? This is the question that calls
      for a response.                                        
        The argument of this article is that a historical and immanent approach, while it is not be
      denied, at the same time cannot provide an answer to this question. Only law in its trans-
      cendent mode can do this, law the foundation of which – to repeat – is beyond immanence.
        We have seen that an immanentist approach assumes that at the origin (whether of soci-
      ety or the law) is violence (‘murder’) and disorder. Rather than bringing clarity to an under-
      standing of how law is opposed to scapegoat logic, the assumption in question only muddies
      the waters. It is thus necessary to accept – contra the times in which we live – that law,
      understood in the strictest sense, has no history: it is always already in place. And so,
      despite what Hobbes, Freud, Girard and others claim, law is primary – not violence.
      ORCID iD                                               
      John Lechte https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8285-8673      
      Notes                                                  
      1. For an overview of the meaning of populism in relation to the ‘people’, see Brubaker (2017).
      2. For an elaboration of this theme, see Lechte (2023a: 183–206, 2023b).
      3. While it is true that Girard’s thesis concerning mimetic desire (for an outline, see Girard,
        2014: 19–26) is integral to his overall theory, it will not be treated here, the better to under-
        stand the status of the scapegoat.                   
      4. Earlier, Girard writes that: ‘In the following pages violent unanimity will, I believe, reveal
        itself as the fundamental phenomenon of primitive religion’ (p. 81).
      5. For an outline of and commentary on the Dreyfus Affair, see Arendt (1968b: 89–120).
      6. Benveniste’s view is confirmed in an important article by Lindsay-Faull (1975), and in a
        thesis by Miller (2014).                             
      7. ‘Thus, the Jews in Nazi Germany or the descendants of the former ruling classes in Soviet
        Russia were not really suspected of hostile action; they had been declared “objective” ene-
        mies of the regime in accordance with its ideology’ (Arendt, 1968a: 121). The terms in ques-
        tion (‘objective’ and ‘hostile’ enemy) were not, in the first instance, formulated by Arendt, but
        were taken over by her to highlight an important element of totalitarian rule.
      8. Schmitt cites Cromwell’s ‘enmity towards papist Spain’ as England’s ‘natural enemy’, that is,
        as an ‘objective’ enemy, not (necessarily) a ‘hostile’ one (see Schmitt, 2007: 67–8).
      9. Chantal Mouffe’s influential definition of the political, inspired by Schmitt, is of significance
        here (see Mouffe, 2013). With her theory of the democratic political as potentially agonistic,
        Mouffe also toys with the notion of a residual, objective enemy.
      10. For Levinas, violence – violence at the origin of society, the violence of war – is the outcome
        of totality. Morality is the effort to transcend totality, thus to transcend politics, which is
        opposed to ethics and morality. Totality, it should be added, is also the sphere of immanence.
        For a summary of Levinas’s position, see the Preface to Totality and Infinity (2012: 21–30).
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lechte                                         91     
                                                             
       11. Umberto Eco takes up this point in relation to the Stoic notion of lekton, where a sign itself
         becomes evidence of something speculative, such as the soul (Eco, 1984: 31).
       12. It is also noteworthy in this context that in The Interpretation of Dreams (1976) Freud refers to
         the relation between primary and secondary processes where the secondary process becomes
         the only evidence of the existence of the primary process. As such, the latter becomes a ‘theo-
         retical fiction’: ‘It is true that, as far as we know, no psychical apparatus exists which pos-
         sesses a primary process only and that such an apparatus is to that extent a theoretical fiction’
         (p. 763).                                           
       13. On this theme, see the work of Bernasconi (1995). 
       References                                            
       Agamben, Giorgio (1998) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life, trans. Daniel Heller-
         Roazen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.    
       Agamben, Giorgio (2005) State of Exception, trans. Kevin Attell. Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.                                              
       Arendt, Hannah (1968a) Totalitarianism: Part Three of The Origins of Totalitarianism. San Diego,
         CA: Harcourt, Brace & Company.                      
       Arendt, Hannah (1968b) Antisemitism: Part One of The Origins of Totalitarianism. San Diego,
         CA: Harcourt, Brace & Company.                      
       Arendt, Hannah (1977) Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York, NY:
         Penguin Books.                                      
       Benveniste, Émile (1969) Le Vocabulaire des institutions indo-européennes 1: économie, parenté,
         société. Paris: Minuit.                             
       Bernasconi, Robert (1995) Heidegger and the invention of the Western philosophical tradition.
         Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 26(3): 240–254.
       Bremmer, Jan (1983) Scapegoat rituals in ancient Greece. Harvard Studies in Classical Philology
         87: 299–320.                                        
       Brubaker, Rogers (2017) Why populism? Theory and Society 46(1): 357–385.
       Coglianese, Cary (2020) Law as scapegoat. Public Law and Legal Theory Research Paper, Series
         No. 20-24. University of Pennsylvania Carey Law School.
       Cooper, Howard (2008) Some thoughts on ‘scapegoating’ and its origins in Leviticus 16. European
         Judaism 41(2): 112–119.                             
       Douglas, Tom (1995) Scapegoats: Transferring Blame. London: Routledge.
       Eco, Umberto (1984) Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language. London: Macmillan.
       Freud, Sigmund (2001) Totem and Taboo, trans. James Strachey. In: The Standard Edition of the
         Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Volume XIII (1913–1914): Totem and
         Taboo and other works. London: Vintage Books.       
       Girard, René (1979) Violence and the Sacred, trans. Patrick Gregory. Baltimore, MD: Johns
         Hopkins University Press.                           
       Girard, René (1989) The Scapegoat, trans. Yvonne Freccero. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
         University Press.                                   
       Girard, René (2014) When These Things Begin: Conversations with Michel Treguer, trans. Cribben
         Merrill, Trevor. East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press.
       Hobbes, Thomas (1971) Leviathan. New York, NY: Collier Books.
       Lacey, Nicola (2019) Populism and the rule of law. Annual Review of Law and Social Science 15:
         79–96.                                              
       Lechte, John (2023a) Violence, Image and Victim in Bataille, Agamben and Girard. Edinburgh:
         Edinburgh University Press.                         

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      92                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(6)
                                                             
      Lechte, John (2023b) Justice, injustice and the work of Julia Kristeva. Theory, Culture & Society
        40(6): 97–68.                                        
      Leiter, Brian (2019) The innocence of becoming: Nietzsche against guilt. Inquiry 62(1): 70–92.
      Levinas, Emmanuel (2012) Totality and Infinity. An Essay on Exteriority, trans. Alphonso Lingis.
        Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University Press.           
      Lindsay-Faull, Margaret (1975) The semantic development of Old English ‘wealh’. Leeds Studies
        in English 8: 20–44.                                 
      Miller, Katherine Leah (2014) The semantic field of slavery in Old English: Wealh, Esne, Þræl.
        PhD Thesis, University of Leeds, UK.                 
      Mouffe, Chantal (2013) Agonistics: Thinking the World Politically. London: Verso.
      Muller, Denis (2021) Enemies of democracy: Populism and scapegoating. In: Muller, Denis,
        Journalism and the Future of Democracy. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 27–38.
      Newman, Saul (2024) Fugitive truth: Renewing the public sphere in the age of post-truth. Javnost:
        The Public 31(3): 327–342.                           
      Rashkow, Ilona (2023) Azazel: The scapegoat in the Bible and the ancient Near East. The Jewish
        Bible Quarterly 51(2): 85–90.                        
      Schey, Taylor (2013) Ritual remembrance: Freud’s primal theory of collective memory. SubStance
        42(1): 102–119.                                      
      Schmitt, Carl (2007) The Concept of the Political, trans. George Schwab. Chicago, IL: University
        of Chicago Press.                                    
      Serres, Michel (1982) The Parasite, trans. Lawrence R. Schehtr. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
        University Press.                                    
      Serres, Michel (2015) Rome: The First Book of Foundations, trans. Randolph Burks. London:
        Bloomsbury Academic.                                 
      Sherwin, Brie D. (2023) Hocus pocus: Modern-day manifestations of witch hunts. Northwestern
        Journal of Law & Social Policy 19(1): 1–39.          
      Stökl, Daniel J. (2002) The Christian exegesis of the scapegoat between Jews and pagans. In:
        Baumgarten, Albert I. (ed.) Sacrifice in Religious Experience. Leiden: Brill, pp. 207–223.
      Vardoulakis, Dimitris (2017) Stasis: Notes toward agonist democracy. Theory & Event 20(3): 699–725.
      Zola, Émile (1898) J’Accuse. Aurore, 13 January. Available at: https://www.marxists.org/archive/
        zola/1898/jaccuse.htm (accessed 26 November 2024).   
      John Lechte is Emeritus Professor in Sociology at Macquarie University in Sydney. His books
      include: Genealogy and Ontology of the Western Image (2012); Agamben and the Politics of
      Human Rights (with Saul Newman) (2013); The Human (2018); Violence and the Image (2023);
      Philosophy of the Medium (2024).                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             