[PAGE 1]
 1146715                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764221146715Theory, Culture & SocietyLee
                                                             
       Global Public Life                                    
                                                             
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Art, Affect, and Social Media        2023, Vol. 40(7-8) 179 –192
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
       in the ‘No Dakota  Access                             
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Pipeline’ Movement                 sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121114466771155
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Robyn Lee                                             
       University of Alberta                                 
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Indigenous-led activism against proposed oil pipelines has relied heavily on social media,
       as in the #NoDAPL campaign against the Dakota Access Pipeline. This paper explores
       affective engagement in online activism, including the Standing Rock ‘check-in’ campaign
       on Facebook. Moving beyond dichotomous understandings of embodied vs digital
       activism, Cannupa Hanska Luger’s Mirror Shields Project employs digital media in order
       to support direct action at Standing Rock. Patricia Clough draws a direct link between
       affect and technoscientific understandings of the body in her concept of biomediated
       bodies. This helps explain how physical and digital activism are linked: the digital and the
       physical cannot be understood as independent of each other, since online engagement
       always has an embodied aspect as well. Luger’s Mirror Shields Project functions as a
       form of alterlife, in resistance to biopower, recognizing historical and ongoing harms
       while also creating new possibilities for resistance. 
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       affect, art, biopolitics, climate change, digital activism, environment, Indigenous
       activism                                              
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       In November 2016, over a million people ‘checked in’ to the Standing Rock Sioux reser-
       vation on Facebook in order to help protect activists protesting the construction of the
       Dakota Access pipeline. A viral post of unknown origin claimed this would shield protes-
       tors from police surveillance. However, the Morton County sheriff’s department denied
       that it was monitoring Facebook check-ins and, while protestors had shared a variety of
       possible support actions, checking in on Facebook was not among them. Despite not
       being of practical use, according to protestors it was a welcome show of solidarity,
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Robyn Lee. Email: robyn5@ualberta.ca
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      180                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      though it would have been better to see people show up and provide direct support.
      Largely ignored by the media until this point, the Facebook check-ins prompted a dra-
      matic increase in coverage of the protests, while also demonstrating that protestors and
      supporters could communicate directly with each other. This virtual action demonstrates
      some of the potential and the pitfalls associated with affect-driven digital activism.
        The $3.8 billion, 1,172-mile (1,886 kilometer) Dakota Access pipeline crosses beneath
      the Missouri River, just north of the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation that straddles the
      North Dakota–South Dakota border. Running from North Dakota to Illinois with a capac-
      ity of 570,000 barrels of oil a day, it is instrumental to the growing oil industry in North
      Dakota and neighboring states. It was subject to months of protests in 2016 and 2017
      since the pipeline’s route threatened the water supply and important Indigenous cultural
      sites and ancient burial grounds. Physical protests halted when the pipeline began carry-
      ing oil in June 2017. The protests at Standing Rock Sioux Reservation have included
      members of more than 100 tribes and are considered to be one of the largest Native
      American protests in recent times. Despite successive legal challenges by the Standing
      Rock Sioux Tribe claiming that the environmental review conducted by the US Army
      Corps of Engineers was insufficient, the Dakota Access pipeline was built and is cur-
      rently operating. However, a federal appeals court has upheld the order of a full environ-
      mental impact review of the Dakota Access pipeline. This will not require the pipeline to
      stop operating.                                        
        Indigenous-led activism against proposed oil pipelines has relied heavily on social
      media, particularly Twitter, as in the #NoDAPL campaign. Resistance to the building of
      the Dakota Access Pipeline also relied on affective response: a sense of shared nation-
      hood, forged through histories of anticolonial activism, as well as a more-than-human
      sense of community and responsibility. Oceti Sakowin (all the Lakota and Dakota nations
      allying together) arose through shared histories of colonization dating back to the 19th
      century and the dispossession of land through environmental devastation couched in
      terms of economic development, including the building of a dam and flooding of
      Indigenous lands. This resistance was both centered in place – Mni Sose (the Missouri
      River) had long been the center of an ‘Indian war that never ends’– and also deeply
      global and technologized, since through social media and technology ‘the world had
      come to #NoDAPL’ (Estes, 2019: 7, 10). The prolonged protest garnered widespread and
      consistent attention on social media, amplifying possibilities for similar protests else-
      where (Steinman, 2019). #NoDAPL tactics – resistance camps, prominent use of social
      media, and online fundraising – have been taken up against other pipeline projects, such
      as the blockades against the Coastal GasLink in northern British Columbia led by the
      Wet’suwet’sun hereditary chiefs (#WetsuwetsunStrong), which sparked cross-Canada
      blockades and demonstrations.                          
        This paper explores the relationship between the virtual realm and the offline world,
      considering how affective engagement in activism is shaped by social media.
      Communications technologies do not merely transmit pre-existing information and
      affect; they play an active role in forming what they ostensibly merely express (Blackman,
      2019; Derrida, 1998). In the age of COVID-19 and Black Lives Matter protests that
      involved both extensive online activism as well as mass protests in the streets, it is even
      more urgent to understand the relationships between embodied standing-with and digital

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           181     
                                                             
       activism. The challenges for activism are clear: when proximity with other humans is a
       direct threat due to a global pandemic, with a Canadian politician openly asserting that
       this is a great time to build pipelines because of restrictions on public protests (Bracken,
       2020), digital activism takes on a renewed importance. How does commitment and
       empathy arise, circulate, and develop in and through physical and digital protests?
        This paper draws on a variety of non-Indigenous as well as Indigenous theorists.
       As a white settler reading Indigenous activism through different theoretical lenses, I
       begin from Million’s (2014) assertion of the worthiness of Indigenous lives as the
       ‘stuff of theory’ and the value of affective experiences or ‘felt knowledge’ of
       Indigenous peoples independent of legitimation by Western academia, which is inex-
       tricably linked to settler colonialism (p. 32). Rejecting binary oppositions of
       Indigenous and modern/technological (Nelson, 1999), I draw from Native Studies
       scholars who argue for conversations between Native Studies and other fields, and the
       ‘intellectual sovereignty’ (Warrior, 1992) of Indigenous scholars and activists: both
       being informed by other disciplines and shaping scholarly discourse as a whole
       (Morgensen, 2011; Smith, 2010).                       
        Social media activism such as checking in on Facebook is limited in its impact, since
       it is inseparable from biopolitical modes of surveillance and limitations on Indigenous
       access to cyberspace (Duarte, 2017). Technology has been used to surveil and limit
       Indigenous-led activism: law enforcement agencies have access to a wide range of tools
       to monitor geo-tagged posts on social media, such as Geofeedia (Levin and Woolf, 2016;
       Waddell, 2016). Patricia Clough’s concept of biomediated bodies is helpful in under-
       standing how the repressive effects of biopolitical racism are deployed through technolo-
       gies of the body, which also simultaneously give rise to potential resistance. Clough
       (2008) argues that affect is at work in biopower.     
        Practices of ‘standing-with’ (TallBear, 2014) are hampered if activism is understood
       as purely digital: Indigenous people gathering in the Oceti Sakowin camp at Standing
       Rock were essential to the protest actions. The action of ‘standing’ is absolutely embod-
       ied, involving a powerful connection to the land, in its specificities. There have, how-
       ever, been important critiques of ‘standing’ as ableist, including Peers and Eales (2017).
       As well, the collective ‘standing with’ at Standing Rock is enabled and promoted
       through forms of technology – social media in particular. The virtual and the physical
       cannot be understood as independent of each other, since online engagement always has
       an embodied aspect as well (Karatzogianni, 2012b: 57). In order to avoid false dichoto-
       mies of ‘real’ (embodied) vs virtual activism, I follow Judith Butler’s argument that
       ‘What bodies are doing on the street when they are demonstrating is linked fundamen-
       tally to what communication devices and technologies are doing when they “report” on
       what is happening in the street. These are different actions, but they both require the
       body’ (Butler, 2015: 93–4).                           
        Moving beyond dichotomous understandings of bodily vs digital activism, I turn to a
       discussion of the art/activism of Luger’s (2016) Mirror Shields Project. Luger is a
       Mandan/Hidatsa/Arikara/Lakota multidisciplinary artist who was born on the Standing
       Rock reservation. He employs digital media in this project in order to support direct
       action, challenging conventional divisions between virtual and embodied. The Mirror
       Shields Project is a form of what Michelle (2018) calls alterlives, in resistance to

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      182                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      biopower, both recognizing historical and ongoing harms while also envisioning new
      futurities and possibilities for resistance and transformation.
                                                             
      Biomediated Bodies and ‘Standing-with’: Biopower, Media,
      Affect                                                 
      The ‘affective turn’ (Clough, 2007, 2008) moves away from dichotomies of mind/body
      and passion/reason, away from subjective states of emotion contained within discrete sub-
      jects, exploring instead how emotions and affect move between bodies, connecting them
      in ‘new configurations of bodies, technology and matter’ (Clough and Halley, 2007: 2).
      Clough (2008) analyzes affect in relation to what she describes as ‘the biomediated body’
      (p. 207), drawing a direct link between affect and technoscientific understandings of the
      body. Clough views affect as encompassing areas of information, surveillance, and capi-
      tal, extending Foucaultian biopower to a Deleuzian-inspired thinking about bodies in
      terms of openness, complexity, and becoming. She moves beyond thinking of bodies as
      merely biological organisms, to analyze how they are increasingly technologized. New
      media and digital technologies expand the capacities of bodily matter invested with capi-
      tal, mapped through DNA sequencing and bioinformatics, and reduced to informational
      substrates under advanced capitalism. Clough’s biomediated body recognizes the biopo-
      litical deployment of racism – locating the Dakota Access Pipeline through the Standing
      Rock reserve, moved from its original route due to concerns about possible contamination
      of drinking water in the mostly white municipality of Bismarck, North Dakota – along
      with the ways in which bodies, work and reproduction are being reconfigured.
        Clough builds upon Eugene (2003) formulation of biomedia. Thacker defined biome-
      dia as a relationship between the technological and the biological, through which the
      biological remains biological while always taking on new capacities. This is not a hybrid
      of body and machine, nor is it a virtual body. Instead, the body is mediated through a
      relationship with technology, increasing the capacities of what the body can do but in
      such a way that technology seems to disappear. As Thacker (2003) puts it, ‘the body you
      get back is not the body with which you began, but you can still touch it’ (p. 53). Clough
      expands Thacker’s concept of biomedia by reading this technological expansion of bod-
      ily capacity through the lens of affect: building intensities through historically specific
      modes that give rise to new potentialities of becoming.
        Clough draws on Deleuze’s conception of the virtual, in which the virtual can be
      real without being actual. In the virtual, objects and states exist but are not tangible or
      ‘concrete’; the virtual is known only indirectly, through its effects (Shields, 2006). The
      virtual is real insofar as it can be interacted with and is generative. For Deleuze, both the
      actual and the virtual are fully real – the former has concrete existence while the latter
      does not, but this does not make it any less real. Affect operates at the level of the virtual,
      the potential and the emergent; it links across senses, events and temporalities. The real-
      ity of the virtual is the reality of change: it operates in terms of openness and indeter-
      minacy (Massumi, 1998).                                
        The militarized response to the protests and the intensive use of technologies of sur-
      veillance (to which the Facebook check-ins were responding) represent what Massumi
      (2015) calls ontopower, a pre-emptive power beyond the biopolitical control of life.
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           183     
                                                             
       Ontopower is the governance of affect, ‘or its modulation when assembled with new
       technologies of time/memory, new media technologies, bio- and neuro-technologies as
       well’ (Clough, 2012: 25). Ontopower, Massumi claims, is a new type of power encom-
       passing both soft power (surveillance) and hard power (military interventions). It sub-
       sumes and transcends biopower. Ontopower refocuses on what may emerge, as that
       potential presents itself to feeling: it is based on an affective mode of pre-emption. As
       such, ontopower can help explain criminalization of anti-pipeline protests: the feeling
       that protests may pose a violent threat even in the absence of any evidence.
        Affect challenges conceptualizations of matter as inert in contrast to active subjects;
       instead affect moves through and between organic and inorganic bodies, without inhering
       in them. The Standing Rock slogan, ‘Mni Wiconi’ – water is life, or more accurately,
       water is alive – can be understood in these affective terms. This understanding of water
       may be described as what Bennett (2010) calls ‘vital matter’: things having the capacity
       to not only ‘impede or block the will and designs of humans but also to act as quasi agents
       or forces with trajectories, propensities, or tendencies of their own’ (p. viii). There are
       risks, however, in reading Indigenous worldviews through a posthuman theoretical lens.
       Todd (2016) notes that posthuman theories often fail to recognize extremely long histories
       of Indigenous worldviews with their complex relationalities of humans and nonhumans.
       As Estes (2019) notes, ‘Concepts such as Mni Wiconi (water is life) may be new to some,
       but like the nation of people the concept belongs to, Mni Wiconi predates and continues
       to exist in spite of white supremacist empires like the United States’ (p. 15).
       Social Media, Bodies in the Street, and Digital Assembly
       Emotions can motivate people to become involved in social movements, keep them
       involved, or lead them to stop participating; activists also appeal to emotions strategi-
       cally in order to incite people to take action (Jasper, 1998; Gould, 2004). Affective trans-
       mission occurs both within and beyond digital realms and may be intensified or muffled
       in the process of digital circulation (Kuntsman, 2012: 1). Technologies do not faithfully
       transmit ideas, data, and feelings, which are instead mediated and constituted through
       their transmission. Consequently, the effects of technological transmission are not pre-
       dictable. As Massumi (2002) puts it, ‘what the mass media transmit is not fundamentally
       image-content but event-potential’ (p. 269). Networked affect (or networked virtuality)
       involves trends, feelings, and processes spreading across social media in ways that
       ‘appear to defy rational logic and understanding’ (Blackman, 2019: 11). Affect is not
       reducible to rationality and thus affective engagement in digital activism cannot be fully
       predicted or controlled; nevertheless, its power and potential are increasingly apparent.
        #NoDAPL is certainly not the only recent protest to rely heavily on digital activism.
       From the Arab Uprising, to Occupy, to the Worldwide Women’s March, to Black
       Lives Matter, to #MeToo, to anti-lockdown protests (Schradie, 2020), to rent strikes
       (Massarenti, 2020), to the GameStop Redditors’ complicated challenge to capitalism,
       increasingly digital platforms are integral to social activism. #NoDAPL, building on
       the Idle No More movement for Indigenous sovereignty, drew heavily on social media
       use, particularly Twitter. The widespread use of digital platforms in Idle No More
       meant that ‘an aspect of Indigeneity, as a paradigm of social and political protest, had
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      184                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      become digitized, infrastructurally through broadband internet, personally through con-
      sumer mobile devices, socially through social media adoption, and discursively through
      flash mobs, hashtags, and memes’ (Duarte, 2017: 5). #NoDAPL and Idle No More
      attained widespread visibility as mass movements through their use of digital platforms,
      yet they both emerged from hundreds of years of ongoing Indigenous resistance (Estes,
      2019; Simpson et al., 2018).                           
        The profile of the #NoDAPL protests increased dramatically at the national and
      international level as a result of checking in on Facebook. During the protests, a rumor
      started that the police were using Facebook to track and arrest activists involved in the
      protests (Kennedy, 2016). Individuals were asked to check-in to the Standing Rock
      Sioux Reservation on Facebook in order to confuse local authorities and provide ano-
      nymity for protestors. This rumor was denied by local police and the action did not
      actually protect protestors, but the show of solidarity that resulted from the campaign
      increased attention to the protests generally and to the fact that protestors were being
      attacked and arrested (Kennedy, 2016). The role of the ‘check-in’ function on Facebook
      in this campaign made the use of social media itself newsworthy (Hunt and
      Gruszczynski, 2019: 5). Both NPR and The Guardian reported that the number of
      check-ins to Standing Rock went from 140,000 to over 1.5 million almost overnight
      (Levin and Woolf, 2016; Hunt and Gruszczynski, 2019; Kennedy, 2016). According to
      Hunt and Gruszczynski (2019), ‘the attention garnered through this interaction of social
      media and traditional forms of media could have broader impacts, such as priming
      attention to pipeline protests and concerns in the future’ (p. 12). Social media played an
      important role in increasing affective engagement with the protest. Since ‘the largest
      spikes in attention’ occurred following violent clashes at protests, it may be that regard-
      less of the media form, vividness is a currency necessary for social movements to
      acquire attention, lacking sustained, large-scale protests that tend to capture attention
      over the long term (Hunt and Gruszczynski, 2019: 13; Jennings and Saunders, 2019).
      Alexandra Deem argues that regardless of their effectiveness, the Facebook check-ins
      reconfigured the structure of solidarity and presence, redefining place and reconstitut-
      ing the virtual and the analog (Deem, 2018: 12). According to Deem, while ‘embodied
      presence provided the model for the disembodied presence enacted by the check-in, it
      was this disembodied presence that lent a new sort of visibility to the bodies actually
      present at Standing Rock’ (Deem, 2018: 12).            
        Karatzogianni (2012b) calls for further theorizing the revolutionary contribution of
      social media in light of the affective structures and politics of emotion (p. 68). She argues
      that the affective structures of social media and digital cultures more broadly allow the
      transformation of the ‘digital virtual’ into the ‘revolutionary virtual’, which can material-
      ize revolution in the offline world (Karatzogianni, 2012b). However, digital activism
      does not necessarily promote progressive social change. Conservative digital activists
      often gain an advantage online. A widening digital activism gap is ‘reproducing, and in
      some cases intensifying, preexisting power imbalances’ due to the tremendous amount of
      labor required (Schradie, 2019: 7). Organizations rich in resources are better positioned
      to make use of digital technologies, while grassroots organizations with less time, money,
      personnel, and structure risk falling behind (Schradie, 2019: 7). Digital activism also
      tends to reinforce existing inequalities by relying on class privilege, horizontal organiza-
      tion, and simplified ideology (Schradie, 2019).        

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           185     
                                                             
        The 2016 US presidential election and accompanying Cambridge Analytica scandal
       have exposed the risks of digital advertising in political campaigns. Facebook and
       Google’s dominance in the market for online advertising has significant repercussions
       for the private regulation of paid political speech, since these decisions are being made
       in the absence of transparency and accountability (Kreiss and Mcgregor, 2019).
       Facebook’s algorithms are far from politically neutral or progressive in their effects,
       creating echo chambers by showing users similar content and thereby increasing political
       polarization (Thorson et al., 2021). This leads to political extremism, toxic political rhet-
       oric, misinformation, and ideologically motivated violence (Uscinski et al., 2021). All
       digital platforms do not create echo chambers to the same degree, however: there are
       significant differences between platforms that allow users to tweak their feed algorithm
       (such as Reddit) and platforms that do not allow this (Facebook and Twitter) (Cinelli
       et al., 2021).                                        
        There are also barriers to online activism that reflect histories of colonization. A deep
       ‘digital divide’ exists between Native Nations of the United States and the rest of the
       country; according to the Federal Communications Commission, only 53% of people
       living on tribal reservations have access to broadband internet, with access particularly
       low in rural tribal areas (Mack et al., 2022; Wang, 2018). Although Simpson et al.
       (2018) recognize the incredible utility of the internet for Indigenous activism, they are
       concerned about the lack of reciprocal relationships between bodies and land on the
       internet, which may constitute a ‘digital dispossession’ (p. 79). They also remain wary
       of the asymmetry of large corporations such as Google, Facebook, and Twitter, where
       Indigenous peoples can be content providers but are unable to structurally intervene in
       digital technologies, reinforcing settler colonialism (Simpson et al., 2018: 79).
       Technologies of Resistance: Biomedia and Art          
       In contrast with the largely passive Facebook check-in campaign, Cannupa Hanska
       Luger’s Mirror Shields Project enhanced creative capacities: online instruction for indi-
       vidual makers of the shields and collective, embodied resistance deploying the shields at
       Standing Rock. The project spans the fields of art and activism, physical and digital resist-
       ance; through affective resistance to biopower, it produced new forms of intensities that
       create possibilities for change. The mirror shields (16 x 48 inch reflective boards) were
       designed, developed, and deployed for use at Standing Rock, where they transformed
       notions of place and space while remaking the boundaries of bodies. Luger (2019)
       described the shields as ‘poetic armour’ (p. 262), providing physical protection for
       Standing Rock protestors while reflecting back the violence of police and security forces.
        Luger took inspiration from mirror shields used by the EuroMaidan movement in
       Ukraine. Protests broke out in late 2013 after then-Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovich
       scrapped a pending trade agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties to
       Russia (Scherker, 2014). After a brutal crackdown by Ukrainian riot police, mirror
       shields were used by protestors to remind police that underneath all their riot gear they
       were still human beings. The EuroMaidan mirror shields also inspired use of similar mir-
       ror shields in 2017 during protests against President Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela
       (Rawlins, 2017).                                      
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      186                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
        Luger’s mirror shields were modified from those used in Ukraine, constructed from
      Masonite boards and reflective adhesive foil rather than glass to be more durable and less
      likely to cause injury. Luger worked with students at the Institute of American Indian Arts
      in Santa Fe, New Mexico, where he is an artist-in-residence, to design the shields and
      posted a video online providing instructions on how to build them. The shields linked the
      makers, across the United States, with water protectors in North Dakota. The shields were
      used on the frontline of the protests, protecting hundreds of people and behind them a
      camp of thousands. Luger (2016) hoped that the mirror shields would inspire the dem-
      onstrators to ‘hold ground and not panic’, promote solidarity among protestors and disrupt
      the violence of uniformed security and police through reflecting their shared humanity.
        Creative tactics, imagery and theatricality are increasingly features of political move-
      ments and struggles (Serafini, 2018: 1), with affect a key aspect of art activist practices
      (Serafini, 2018: 174). As Clough (2012) describe, ‘The measure of affect is an aesthetic
      measure, understanding aesthetic measure to be singular, non-generalizable, particular to
      each event, or each capture of the not-yet’ (p. 29). The combination of art and digital
      technologies in Indigenous resistance has an extensive history. De La Garza (2016)
      describes how digital technology ‘resembles and even parallels traditional Indigenous
      means of producing and sharing knowledge and of experiencing time and space’ (p. 49).
      Nelson (1999) coins the term ‘Maya-hacker’ to describe the vital importance of informa-
      tion to political strategies of Indigenous resistance in Guatemala. The Zapatista move-
      ment also relied on virtual protests, drawing together theatre and activism in the digital
      realm (Lane and Dominguez, 2003).                      
        Performativity provides a way of understanding the complex, iterative relationships
      between digital and physical protest and between art and activism (Vlavo, 2017). In her
      analysis of assembly, Butler (2015) describes how collective actions of various kinds
      performatively produce ‘the people’. Bodies protesting are essentially making a per-
      formative claim to belong there, to have a right to exist and assemble, both prior to and
      in addition to any of their specific political demands. These modes of assembly are not
      limited to physical gatherings for Butler (2015), since ‘not everyone can appear in a bod-
      ily form, and many of those who cannot appear, who are constrained from appearing or
      who operate through virtual or digital networks, are also part of “the people”’ (p. 8).
        The mirror shields represent an opening to an affirmative biopolitics (Esposito, 2008),
      which involves recognizing that harming one life harms all lives. The shields protected
      protestors from the rubber bullets of DAPL security guards while reflecting back the
      securitized, uniformed forces not just as instruments of biopower but as affected and
      affecting humans. The mirror shields produce what Massumi (2002) terms intensity,
      which he equates with affect (p. 27). Intensity is     
        associated with nonlinear processes: resonance and feedback that momentarily suspend the
        linear progress of the narrative present from past to future. Intensity is qualifiable as an emotional
        state, and that state is static – temporal and narrative noise. It is a state of suspense, potentially
        of disruption . . . It is not exactly passivity, because it is filled with motion, vibratory motion,
        resonation. And it is not yet activity, because the motion is not of the kind that can be directed (if
        only symbolically) toward practical ends in a world of constituted objects and aims. (Massumi,
        2002: 26)                                            
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           187     
                                                             
        Luger’s Mirror Shield Project represents perceiving the present in the past, observing
       current protests in a historical mirror. Unlike linear notions of time dominant in settler
       worldviews, Indigenous conceptions of time understand the present as structured by the
       past and ancestors, with alternative futures made possible through relationship to the past
       (Estes, 2019). Resistance to the Dakota Access Pipeline was inspired by the Lakota
       prophecy of Zuzeca Sapa, the Black Snake, that would stretch over the land and threaten
       all life, beginning with water (Estes, 2019: 14). Estes (2019) describes such prophecies
       as a ‘revolutionary theory, a way to help us think about our relationship to the land, to
       other humans and other than humans, and to history and time’ (p. 14).
        The use of mirrors in Indigenous resistance has a long history. Carcelén-Estrada
       (2017) traces a genealogy in a Zapatista story which explains how to kill a lion not with
       a gun but with a mirror, which is used to deflect the lion’s power and direct it against
       itself (p. 104). The 2016 Water Serpent Action built on this tradition, as well as reflecting
       the prophecy of the Black Snake. Conceived and enacted by Luger and Rory Wakemup
       (Ojibwe), it involved more than 150 protestors holding the mirror shields above their
       heads as they marched along the snow-covered Oceti Sakowin camp near Standing Rock,
       creating a moving river or serpent-like formation, documented from above by drone
       camera. The audience for this action were police surveillance planes constantly flying
       overhead; it was intended to provide evidence of the water protectors’ resilience and
       reflect back the harms of police surveillance. In walking the shape of the river, light
       reflected off the shields like water, the lines between human body and nonhuman nature
       were blurred, challenging extractive views of the natural world and asserting Indigenous
       sovereignty over the land (Davis, 2019: 149; Morris, 2019).
        The Mirror Shield Project produced new affective and bodily capacities, transforming
       the relationships between bodies and landscapes and challenging biopower. Many other
       actions involving the mirror shields were organized by anonymous communities online,
       including one of over 1000 US veterans who came from across the country to guard water
       protectors from the police with mirror shields and other handmade protective shields. The
       mirror shields continue to be made anonymously and used in frontline actions around the
       world, including Black Lives Matter protests across the United States in 2020.
       Conclusion: #NoDAPL’s Alterlives                      
       Affect can be a powerful driver of action. Technology provides both opportunities and
       obstacles, promoting empathy by giving us a glimpse into the lives of others but also
       potentially misrepresenting our capacity to share the embodied experiences of others. To
       what extent do social media strategies such as checking in at Standing Rock on Facebook
       constitute a form of solidarity? How much of this is a technological buffer between a
       passive audience and committed activists, an example of ‘cruel optimism’ (Berlant,
       2011): a fantasy of effortless allyship possible through the click of a ‘like’ button dis-
       guising underlying apathy and perpetuation of privilege? Is there a need to recognize the
       limits of empathy along with the limits of a decentered, posthumanist subjectivity?
        Clough (2008) describes biomediated bodies as operating at the postbiological thresh-
       old. This threshold is indeterminate, however: it is ‘the limit point beyond which there
       will have been change irreducible to causes’ (p. 19). Clough notes that the affective turn
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      188                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      has already been mined by capitalism: capital accumulates in the realm of affect and rac-
      ism helps realize this accumulation economically. Nevertheless, Clough (2008) sounds a
      note of cautious optimism: ‘it is important to remember the virtual at the threshold.
      Beyond it, always a chance for something else, unexpected, new’ (p. 19). In the title of
      his history of Indigenous resistance, Estes (2019) claims that ‘our history is the future’.
      Through relationship to the past it is possible to imagine new possibilities for the future.
      This is a time of what Murphy (2018) calls alterlife: ‘the struggle to exist again, but dif-
      ferently when already in conflicted, damaging, and deadly conditions, a state of already
      having been altered, of already being in the aftermath, and yet persisting’ (p. 113).
      Protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline can be thought of in terms of alterlives – a
      state of already having been altered by environmental violence that is nonetheless a
      capacity to persist and to become something else (Murphy, 2017). Alterlives resist colo-
      nialist biopower through imagining futurity and ways of being otherwise that are rooted
      in local communities and intimate relations, that build on past and current political pro-
      jects of resistance (Murphy, 2018: 122). Luger’s mirror shields show us both what is –
      the racist history of settler colonialism, dispossession of Indigenous lands, environmental
      destruction – while also creating new possibilities, new forms of relationality, rerouting
      of affect, and reconfigured boundaries between us and them, protestor and police. Time
      and space are transformed through relation to the long history of Indigenous resistance
      to dispossession from their land and damage to Mni Sosa (the Missouri River). The bio-
      mediated body is rooted in biopolitical racism, and yet it is transformed through art,
      community, technology, and embodied resistance in Standing Rock. New potentialities
      and forms of emergence have become possible.           
        US President Biden’s cancellation of the Keystone XL project raised hopes that DAPL
      will meet a similar fate. The environmental review by the Army Corps is ongoing and,
      whatever the outcome, the losing side is likely to continue the fight in the Supreme
      Court. Even if #NoDAPL is not able to shut down the pipeline in the near future, in peri-
      ods of abeyance social media can help retain ‘the people (resources) needed to accumu-
      late and maintain the power to carry on the movement’ (Leong et al., 2019: 191). Social
      media use in #NoDAPL is described by Clark and Hinzo (2019) as ‘digital survivance’,
      combining aspects of survival and resistance (Vizenor, 1999). This digital survivance
      involves ‘the digital and visual practices of Indigenous peoples and their allies as they
      have drawn upon and advanced Indigenous epistemologies and storytelling traditions
      within the contexts and constraints of social media’ (Clark and Hinzo, 2019: 94).
      #NoDAPL digital survivance includes networks of online and embodied solidarities ena-
      bling future Indigenous-led resistance against pipeline development. The biomediated
      body has changed through protest, standing-with, and checking-in. New potentialities
      and forms of emergence have become possible. Through interconnections of fluids and
      circuits, water protectors and Twitter-users, affective expansions of bodily capacities
      give rise to solidarity and new forms of ‘standing-with’ between biomediated bodies.
      References                                             
      Bennett, Jane (2010) Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Durham, NC: Duke University\
        Press.                                               
      Berlant, Lauren (2011) Cruel Optimism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           189     
                                                             
       Blackman, Lisa (2019) Haunted Data: Affect, Transmedia, Weird Science. London: Bloomsbury
         Publishing.                                         
       Bracken, Amber (2020) Alberta minister says it’s a ‘great time’ to build a pipeline because COVID-
         19 restrictions limit protests against them. The Globe and Mail, 25 May 2020. Available at:
         https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/alberta/article-alberta-minister-says-its-a-great-
         time-to-build-a-pipeline-because/ (accessed 9 August 2019).
       Butler, Judith (2015) Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly. Boston, MA: Harvard
         University Press.                                   
       Carcelén-Estrada, Antonia (2017) Weaving Abya-Yala: The decolonial aesthetics of Indigenous
         resistance. New Diversities 19(2): 103–117.         
       Cinelli, Matteo, De Francisci Morales, Gianmarco, Galeazzi, Alessandro, et al. (2021) The echo
         chamber effect on social media. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(9):
         e2023301118.                                        
       Clark, Lynn Schofield and Hinzo, Angel (2019) Digital survivance: Mediatization and the sacred
         in the tribal digital activism of the #NoDAPL movement. Journal of Religion, Media and
         Digital Culture 8(1): 76–104.                       
       Clough, Patricia Ticineto (2007) Introduction. In: Halley, Jean O’Malley, and Clough, Patricia
         Ticineto (eds) The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social. Durham, NC: Duke University
         Press, pp. 1–33.                                    
       Clough, Patricia Ticineto (2008) The affective turn: Political economy, biomedia and bodies.
         Theory, Culture & Society 25(1): 1–22.              
       Clough, Patricia Ticineto (2012) War by other means: What differences do(es) the graphic(s)
         make? In: Karatzogianni, Athina, and Kuntsman, Adi (eds) Digital Cultures and the Politics
         of Emotion: Feelings, Affect and Technological Change. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp.
         21–32.                                              
       Clough, Patricia Ticineto and Halley, Jean O’Malley (2007) The Affective Turn: Theorizing the
         Social. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.          
       Davis, Thomas S. (2019) Perceptual methods. Cultural Dynamics 31(1–2): 144–150.
       Deem, Alexandra (2018) Mediated intersections of environmental and decolonial politics in the
         No Dakota Access Pipeline Movement. Theory Culture and Society 36(5): 113–131.
       De la Garza, Armida (2016) Aboriginal digitalities: Indigenous peoples and new media. In: Travis,
         Charles, and von Lunen, Alexander (eds) The Digital Arts and Humanities: Neogeography,
         Social Media and Big Data Integrations and Applications. London: Springer, pp. 49–62.
       Derrida, Jacques (1998) Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression, trans. Eric Prenowitz. Chicago,
         IL: University of Chicago Press.                    
       Duarte, Maria Elena (2017) Network Sovereignty: Building the Internet across Indian Country.
         Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.        
       Esposito, Roberto (2008) Bíos: Biopolitics and Philosophy. Minneapolis, MN: University of
         Minnesota Press.                                    
       Estes, Nick (2019) Our History is the Future: Standing Rock Versus the Dakota Access Pipeline,
         and the Long Tradition of Indigenous Resistance. New York, NY: Verso Books.
       Gould, Deborah B. (2004) Passionate political processes: Bringing emotions back into the study of
         social movements. In: Goodwin, Jeff and Jasper, James M. (eds) Rethinking Social Movements:
         Structure, Meaning, and Emotion. Lanham: Rowman and Littlefield, pp.155–176.
       Hunt, Kate and Gruszczynski, Mike (2019) The influence of new and traditional media coverage
         on public attention to social movements: The case of the Dakota Access Pipeline protests.
         Information, Communication & Society 24(7): 1024–1040.
       Jasper, James (1998) The emotions of protest: Affective and reactive emotions in and around
         social movements. Sociological Forum 13: 397–424.   

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      190                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      Jennings, Will and Saunders, Clare (2019) Street demonstrations and the media agenda: An anal-
        ysis of the dynamics of protest agenda setting. Comparative Political Studies 52(13–14):
        2283–2313.                                           
      Karatzogianni, Athina (2012a) Epilogue: The politics of the affective digital. In: Karatzogianni,
        Athina, and Kuntsman, Adi (eds) Digital Cultures and the Politics of Emotion: Feelings,
        Affect and Technological Change. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 245–249.
      Karatzogianni, Athina (2012b) WikiLeaks affects: Ideology, conflict and the revolutionary
        virtual. In: Karatzogianni, Athina, and Kuntsman, Adi (eds) Digital Cultures and the Politics
        of Emotion: Feelings, Affect and Technological Change. London: Palgrave Macmillan,
        pp. 52–73.                                           
      Kennedy, Merrit (2016) More than a Million ‘Check In’ on Facebook to Support the Standing
        Rock Sioux. Available at: https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/11/01/500268879/
        more-than-a-million-check-in-on-facebook-to-support-the-standing-rock-sioux (accessed 5
        May 2018).                                           
      Kreiss, Daniel and Mcgregor, Shannon C. (2019) The ‘arbiters of what our voters see’: Facebook
        and Google’s struggle with policy, process, and enforcement around political advertising.
        Political Communication 36(4): 499–522.              
      Kuntsman, Adi (2012) Introduction: Affective fabrics of digital cultures. In: Karatzogianni, Athina
        and Kuntsman, Adi (eds) Digital Cultures and the Politics of Emotion: Feelings, Affect and
        Technological Change. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp.1–17.
      Lane, Jill and Dominguez, Ricardo (2003) Digital Zapatistas. TDR (1988–) 47(2): 129–144.
      Leong, Carmen, Pan, Shan L., Bahri, Shamshul, et al. (2019) Social media empowerment in social
        movements: Power activation and power accrual in digital activism. European Journal of
        Information Systems 28(2): 173–204.                  
      Levin, Sam and Woolf, Nicky (2016) A million people ‘check in’ at Standing Rock on Facebook
        to support Dakota pipeline protesters. The Guardian. Available at: https://www.the-
        guardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/north-dakota-access-pipeline-protest-mass-facebook-
        check-in (accessed 19 November 2019).                
      Luger, Cannupa Hanska (2016) Mirror Shield Project. Available at: http://www.cannupahanska.
        com/mniwiconi (accessed 2 November 2020).            
      Luger, Cannupa Hanska (2019) The Mirror Shield Project. In: Alvarez, Natalie, Lauzon, Claudette,
        and Zaiontz, Keren (eds) Sustainable Tools for Precarious Times: Performance Actions in the
        Americas. Cham: Springer, pp. 260–262.               
      Mack, Elizabeth A., Helderop, Edward, Keene, Thomas, et al. (2022) A longitudinal analysis of
        broadband provision in tribal areas. Telecommunications Policy 46(5): 102333.
      Massarenti, Margherita (2020) How Covid-19 led to a #Rentstrike and what it can teach us
        about online organizing. Interface: A Journal for and About Social Movements 12(1):
        339–346.                                             
      Massumi, Brian (1998) Sensing the virtual, building the insensible. Architectural Design 68(5/6):
        16–25.                                               
      Massumi, Brian (2002) Parables for the Virtual: Movement, Affect, Sensation. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Massumi, Brian (2015) Ontopower: War, Powers, and the State of Perception, illustrated edn.
        Durham, NC: Duke University Press.                   
      Million, Dian (2014) There is a river in me: Theory from life. In: Simpson, Audra, and Smith,
        Andrea (eds) Theorizing Native Studies. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, pp. 31–42.
      Morgensen, Scott Lauria (2011) Spaces Between Us: Queer Settler Colonialism and Indigenous
        Decolonization. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
      Morris, Kate (2019) Shifting Grounds: Landscape in Contemporary Native American Art. Seattle,
        WA: University of Washington Press.                  

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Lee                                           191     
                                                             
       Murphy, Michelle (2017) What can’t a body do? Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience 3(1):
         1–15.                                               
       Murphy, Michelle (2018) Against population, towards alterlife. In: Clark, Adele, and Haraway,
         Donna J. (eds) Making Kin Not Population. Chicago, IL: Prickly Paradigm Press, pp. 101–124.
       Nelson, Diane M. (1999) A Finger in the Wound: Body Politics in Quincentennial Guatemala.
         Oakland, CA: University of California Press.        
       Peers, Danielle and Eales, Lindsay (2017) ‘Stand Up’ for Exclusion?: Queer pride, ableism, and
         inequality. In: Smith, M. S. and Jaffar, F. (eds.) Beyond the Queer Alphabet: Conversations
         on Gender, Sexuality and Intersectionality. Teaching Equity Matters E-Book Series.
       Rawlins, Carlos Garcia (2017) Venezuela’s shield-bearing protesters – in pictures. The Guardian,
         17 July. Available at: http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2017/jul/17/
         venezuelas-shield-bearing-protesters-in-pictures (accessed 5 January 2023).
       Scherker, Amanda (2014) After being beaten by police, these protesters came back armed with
         something stronger than weapons. Huffpost, 15 January. Available at: https://www.huffpost.
         com/entry/ukraine-protests-mirrors_n_4596853 (accessed 15 October 2020).
       Schradie, Jen (2019) The Revolution That Wasn’t: How Digital Activism Favors Conservatives.
         Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.               
       Schradie, Jen (2020) ‘Give me liberty or give me Covid-19’: Anti-lockdown protesters were
         never Trump puppets. Communication and the Public 5(3–4): 126–128. DOI: 10.1177
         /2057047320969433.                                  
       Serafini, Paula (2018) Performance Action: The Politics of Art Activism. New York, NY:
         Routledge.                                          
       Shields, Rob (2006) Virtualities. Theory, Culture & Society 23(2/3): 284–286.
       Simpson, Leanne Betasamosake, Walcott, Rinaldo, and Coulthard, Glen (2018) Idle No More and
         Black Lives Matter: An exchange (panel discussion). Studies in Social Justice 12(1): 75–89.
       Smith, Andrea (2010) Queer theory and native studies: The heteronormativity of settler colonial-
         ism. GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 16(1–2): 41–68.
       Steinman, Erich (2019) Why was Standing Rock and the #NoDAPL campaign so historic? Factors
         affecting American Indian participation in social movement collaborations and coalitions.
         Ethnic and Racial Studies 42(7): 1070–1090.         
       TallBear, Kim (2014) Standing with and speaking as faith: A feminist-Indigenous approach to
         inquiry. Journal of Research Practice 10(2): 1–7.   
       Thacker, Eugene (2003) What is biomedia? Configurations 11(1): 47–79.
       Thorson, Kjersten, Cotter, Kelley, Medeiros, Mel, et al. (2021) Algorithmic inference, political
         interest, and exposure to news and politics on Facebook. Information, Communication &
         Society 24(2): 183–200.                             
       Todd, Zoe (2016) An Indigenous feminist’s take on the ontological turn: ‘Ontology’ is just another
         word for colonialism. Journal of Historical Sociology 29(1): 4–22.
       Uscinski, Joseph E., Enders, Adam M., Seelig, Michelle I., et al. (2021) American politics in
         two dimensions: Partisan and ideological identities versus anti-establishment orientations.
         American Journal of Political Science 65(4): 877–895.
       Vizenor, Gerald R. (1999) Manifest Manners: Narratives on Postindian Survivance. Omaha, NE:
         University of Nebraska Press.                       
       Vlavo, Fidèle A. (2017) Performing Digital Activism: New Aesthetics and Discourses of
         Resistance. New York, NY: Routledge.                
       Waddell, Robinson and Waddell, Kaveh (2016) Did the ‘check-in at Standing Rock’ campaign
         start with protesters? The Atlantic, 31 October. Available at: https://www.theatlantic.
         com/technology/archive/2016/10/facebook-is-overtaken-with-check-ins-to-standing-
         rock/505988/ (accessed 27 April 2019).              

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      192                            Theory, Culture & Society 40(7-8)
                                                             
      Wang, Hansi Lo (2018) Native Americans on tribal land are ‘the least connected’ to high-speed
        internet. NPR, 6 December. Available at: https://www.npr.org/2018/12/06/673364305/
        native-americans-on-tribal-land-are-the-least-connected-to-high-speed-internet (accessed 21
        June 2019).                                          
      Warrior, Robert Allen (1992). Intellectual sovereignty and the struggle for an American Indian
        future. Chapter 3 of Tribal Secrets: Vine Deloria, John Joseph Mathews, and the recovery of
        American Indian intellectual traditions. Wicazo Sa Review 8(1): 1–20.
      Robyn Lee is an Associate Professor in the Department of Sociology at the University of Alberta.
      She is the author of The Ethics and Politics of Breastfeeding: Power, Pleasure, Poetics (University
      of Toronto Press, 2018) and has published articles in a variety of journals including Feminist
      Theory, Hypatia, and Environmental Politics. Her work explores theoretical issues of embodi-
      ment, subjectivity, gender, and reproductive and environmental health.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             