[PAGE 1]
 1259922                                                     
 research-article2024 TCS0010.1177/02632764241259922Theory, Culture & SocietyLoizidou
                                                             
                                                             
       E-Special Issue Introduction                          
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Judith Butler: Life, Philosophy,     2024, Vol. 41(7-8) 285 –308
                                              © The Author(s) 2024
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Politics, Ethics: E-Special Issue                     
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462442142125599992222
       Introduction                                          
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Elena Loizidou                                        
       Birkbeck College, University of London                
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This e-special issue of Theory, Culture & Society presents works published by and
       about US philosopher and activist Judith Butler (b. 1956), Distinguished Scholar at the
       Graduate School, University of California, Berkeley. They have contributed to Theory,
       Culture & Society and inspired key debates and scholarship around their work. Gender
       Trouble transformed our understanding of gender, influencing generations of academics,
       activists, and cultural producers. Butler is an exceptional thinker who aims to build more
       inclusive and sustainable societies through their writing, which has influenced numerous
       fields, e.g. sociology, gender studies, politics, and the arts. The editorial introduction
       juxtaposes earlier and subsequent writings by Butler in order to encourage a wider
       reading of their work. Drawing upon the full catalogue of Theory, Culture & Society
       and Body & Society, the collection includes articles published by Butler, interviews with
       them, a book review, and articles about their work.   
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       bodies, Judith Butler, ethics, feminism, gender performativity, subjectivity, vulnerability
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       Following the publication of The Force of Non-Violence (Butler, 2020), Judith Butler
       gave an interview to the journalist and writer Jules Gleeson for The New Yorker (Gleeson,
       9 February 2020). Gleeson introduces Judith Butler as ‘hold[ing] a peculiar place in
       contemporary Western culture. Like very few men and perhaps no other woman, Butler
       is an international celebrity academic’ (9 February 2020). Judith Butler is indeed an
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Elena Loizidou. Email: e.loizidou@bbk.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      286                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      internationally renowned academic who, if I may rephrase Gleeson’s description, is a
      cultural icon; they are, for example, the object of a 1993 fanzine Judy!, they make an
      appearance in Maggie Nelson’s auto-fictional novel The Argonauts (Nelson, 2016) and
      also in Merlí (2015–18), a Spanish television series about a philosophy teacher whose
      pedagogical aim is to instil curiosity in his students and which dedicates an episode to
      Judith Butler. Butler’s writings and appearances in the media both exemplify their status
      as a cultural icon but also reveal their power to influence debates. For example, in the
      interview that they gave to Gleeson (7 September 2021) for the Guardian newspaper,
      they spoke in support of trans activists in their struggle for recognition and were critical
      of the anti-gender ideology movement for its attacks on trans activists. Butler’s analysis
      and their pro-trans position gave rise to comments, discussions, and attacks in the social
      media. Judith Butler’s cultural iconicity and their sustained influence on gender, politics,
      ethics, and culture comes about not because they flirt with sensationalism or because
      they chase celebrity status but because of their commitment to thinking; to thinking how
      we can create worlds that ameliorate social exclusion and differential treatment.
        In describing Butler’s philosophical thinking as an ‘assault to common sense’ in
      Guernica, an online art and politics magazine, Schneider (15 March 2010) aptly captures
      the clarity, sharpness, and innovation of Butler’s thinking, maintaining that it is precisely
      these qualities that makes us read Judith Butler and think with Judith Butler. Butler’s
      philosophical and cultural influence makes demands on them; demands for more public
      engagements or to respond to political and cultural events. When pushed by Gleeson to
      explain how they manage their fame, Judith Butler replied: ‘I have found a way to live to
      the side of my name’ (7 September 2021), in a non-judgemental statement about those
      who chase fame that simultaneously reveals that they never chased such fame them-
      selves. A set of adjectives does not suffice to fully grasp the quality of Judith Butler’s
      thinking and their iconic status.                      
        When Gleeson asked Butler to expand on the statement made in Force of Non-
      Violence that our ethical obligations to others or the world need to be unrealistic, Butler
      responded, ‘Sometimes you have to imagine in a radical way that makes you seem a little
      crazy, that puts you in an embarrassing light, in order to open up a possibility that others
      have already closed down with their already knowing realism’ (9 February 2020). This
      succinct and passionate answer captures the kernel of their thinking and practice. It is a
      practice characterized by a sustained commitment to thinking the impossible, reflecting
      on pressing contemporary questions, and generosity, and it is always in solidarity with
      those who demand and labour for a better world, because as they repeatedly remind us,
      we are bound to one another. A commitment to a better future amidst a world in ruins. All
      this, together with hard work, makes Judith Butler the philosopher who has captured our
      cultural imagination and made us engage with their work in such depth.
      The Making of a Philosopher: A Brief Biography         
      Judith Butler was born on 24 February 1956 in Cleveland, Ohio. The daughter of Jewish
      parents, a dentist father and a housing activist mother, from a young age they participated
      in the General Jewish Education program where they found the synagogue classes on
      ethics particularly interesting. They enjoyed the debates and ‘found them existentially
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      287     
                                                             
       pertinent’, as they reveal in an interview they gave to Rabbi Dr Shmuly Yanklowitz (7
       April 2020). They read the philosophical works of Baruch Spinoza and Moses ben
       Maimon (Maimonides), trying to make sense of how they relate to ‘how people made
       choices during the Second World War, whether Jews fled, or hid or how they could be
       part of resistance, how they could offer support for one another, under conditions . . .
       that were utterly atrocious’ (7 April 2020: 1.10–1.33). These ethics classes obviously
       triggered their curiosity and whetted their appetite for philosophy and were probably
       formative for their philosophical writings. I think it is important to note that Judith
       Butler’s interest and engagement with philosophy does not begin with their university
       studies, but rather stems from their early life. They then went on to study philosophy at
       Bennington College, where they received a BA (1978) and an MA (1984), and a PhD
       (1988) from Yale University.                          
        Judith Butler is currently a Distinguished Scholar at the Graduate School at the
       University of California, Berkeley. They previously held the Maxine Elliot Chair in the
       Department of Comparative Literature and the Program of Critical Theory, also at
       Berkeley. Professor Butler has published over 18 books on gender, sexuality, nonvio-
       lence, human rights, solidarity, ethics, psychoanalysis, literature, aesthetics, and the
       Covid-19 pandemic. Gender Trouble (Butler, 1990), their second book, revolutionized
       the way we think about gender, feminism, and sexuality within and outside the academy,
       as their numerous awards testify. In 2012 they were awarded two prestigious awards, the
       Adorno Prize from the City of Frankfurt for their contributions to feminist and moral
       philosophy and the Brudner Prize from Yale University for lifetime contributions to gay
       and lesbian studies. In 2014 the French Cultural Ministry awarded them the Chevalier of
       the Order of Arts and Letters Diploma. In 2016 the City of Cologne awarded them the
       Albertus Magnus Professorship – an award granted to internationally renowned indi-
       viduals whose work addresses issues of importance beyond the Academy.
        Judith Butler’s work is situated within the field of critical theory and the humanities,
       and as such they have been an avid supporter of both. They received the Andrew Mellon
       Award for Distinguished Academic Achievement in the Humanities, which was used to
       originate and develop the International Consortium of Critical Theory Programs (2016–
       20), from which the journal Critical Times emerged. Judith Butler served as a co-chair of
       the Consortium and as an editorial board member of Critical Times. They were elected
       in 2019 as Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and they served as
       president of the Modern Language Association (2020) and were elected a Corresponding
       Fellow of the British Academy the same year. Their work has influenced many disci-
       plines, including geography; unsurprisingly, in 2015 the American Association of
       Geographers made them an ‘honorary geographer’. More recently, in 2022, the canton of
       Catalunya awarded Butler the Catalonia International Prize and the gold medal from the
       Circulo de Bellas Artes in Madrid. They are the recipient of 14 honorary degrees from
       universities, including Université Paris-VII, McGill University in Canada, University of
       St. Andrews in Scotland, Université de Fribourg in Switzerland, Universidad de Buenos
       Aires in Argentina, Universidad de Chile, and Belgrade University and are a College
       Fellow at Birkbeck University. Additionally, they have received fellowships from
       Guggenheim, Rockefeller, and Ford Foundations, from the American Council of Learned
       Societies, and were a Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton and at the

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      288                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      Ecole Normale Supérieure in Paris. In 2023–4 they have been invited to take up a resi-
      dency at Center Pompidou in Paris. They are also an avid activist for gender and human
      rights, with a sustained commitment to anti-war politics, not only as evidenced in Frames
      of War: When Is Life Grievable? (Butler, 2009), Parting Ways: Jewishness and the
      Critique of Zionism (Butler, 2012a) and The Force of Non-violence (Butler, 2020), but
      also through the work they do with the Jewish Voice for Peace and its Committee on
      Academic Freedom, where they serve on the advisory board. Additionally, they are a
      member of the Advisory Council of the New University in Exile at the New School
      University and on the board of the Center for Constitutional Rights, respectively located
      in New York City.                                      
        When one meets Judith Butler, and I am lucky enough to have done so on numerous
      occasions over the years, one is impressed by their generosity and kindness. Judith Butler
      is not one of those philosophers who looks down on another’s stumbling thinking, but
      rather a rare human who patiently listens to what you say and then proceeds to ask the
      most searching questions, which help iron out one’s thought process. One is also
      impressed by their presence, and by this I mean by their ability to be present and active
      towards interlocutors, political events, cultural demands and even fans. In one of their
      pre-pandemic lectures in London, I and several colleagues from Birkbeck and London
      School of Economics found ourselves dining with Judith Butler at the North Sea Fish
      Restaurant in Leigh Street, in Bloomsbury. A young queer waitress shyly came up to our
      table and asked Judith Butler, ‘Are you Judith Butler?’, to which they answered that
      indeed they were. On hearing this the waitress excitedly reported just how much her
      feminist/queer community and its activism had been influenced by Judith Butler’s phi-
      losophy. Although all of us around the table had been influenced by their philosophy, it
      was very special, though not surprising, to witness the young woman’s enthusiasm and
      admiration.                                            
        I recall asking Judith Butler afterwards whether all this attention bothered them. They
      replied that they had come to terms with the phenomenon of ‘Judith Butler’ and felt that
      it was appropriate to engage with people that recognize them. There was a stoicism in
      their reply, revealing the fact that they had given this matter a lot of thought. Most of us,
      I suspect, would feel such attention or demands from strangers as an encroachment on
      our privacy, a theft of our time, or even suffocating. Others, of course, may welcome this
      type of adulation, and do their best to get more of it. Judith Butler’s response to the
      excitement of the admirer was neither one of withdrawal nor one of over-exposure, but
      rather one of presence, and in that presence I witnessed the working of one of their philo-
      sophical propositions – we are all bound to one another – that subjects are constituted by
      the Other, a proposition that they put forward in Subjects of Desire: Hegelian Reflections
      in Twentieth-Century France (Butler, 1999a) and Gender Trouble (Butler, 1990). Living
      out one’s philosophical position is both hard and remarkable but a requisite of a philoso-
      pher, if we are to follow Peter Sloterdijk’s observation ‘that for the philosopher, the
      human being who exemplifies the love of truth and conscious living, life and doctrine
      must be in harmony’ (Sloterdijk, 2005: 111). Sloterdijk goes on to say that for philoso-
      phers the most difficult task is not ‘to live what they say’ (Sloterdijk, 2005: 111) but
      rather ‘to say what they live’ (Sloterdijk, 2005: 112).
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      289     
                                                             
       Saying What We Live: Philosophy, Ethics and Politics  
       Butler’s ability to say what they live is exemplified in their writings. For example, in
       Gender Trouble (Butler, 1990) we find out how gender is formed. We learn that whilst
       sex is assigned to us at birth, gender is not, and furthermore that gender is not a natural
       phenomenon. Gender is performative and a process; it challenges the idea that things are
       natural, including ‘sex’, and addresses the social and cultural limits to our understanding
       of gender. In telling us that neither ‘sex’ nor ‘gender’ are as fixed as laws and social
       norms would have us believe, Judith Butler asks us to be attentive to the world around
       us, noticing and pointing out the differences and exclusions that are marked by norma-
       tive understandings.                                  
                                                             
       Gender and the Collective Subject                     
       Gender Trouble problematizes and critiques the way in which certain feminisms under-
       stood gender within the binary framework femininity/masculinity, and consequently a
       heteronormative logic. As they write in the 1999 preface of Gender Trouble:
                                                             
        In 1989 I was most concerned to criticize pervasive heterosexual assumptions in feminist
        literary theory. I sought to counter those views that made presumptions about the limits and
        propriety of gender and restricted the meaning of gender to received notions of masculinity and
        femininity. It was and remains my view that any feminist theory that restricts the meaning of
        gender in the presuppositions of its own practice sets up exclusionary gender norms within
        feminism, often with homophobic consequences. It seemed to me, and continues to seem, that
        feminism ought to be careful not to idealize certain expressions of gender that, in turn, produce
        new forms of hierarchy and exclusion. In particular, I oppose those regimes of truth that
        stipulated that certain kinds of gendered expressions were found to be false or derivative, and
        others, true and original. (Gender Trouble, 1999b: vii–viii)
       Their ability to say what they see in relation to gender was not limited in the 1990
       debates about gender. More recently, in response to the attacks waged against gender by
       the anti-gender ideology movement, Judith Butler explains that a certain fantasy about
       gender presents gender as a threat to human existence. This fantasy has had devastating
       effects; it stokes fear in populations that are not open to differences and restores patriar-
       chal, racist, and capitalist values.1 As they say, the anti-gender movement is:
        a global movement [that] insists that sex is biological and real, or that sex is divinely ordained,
        and that gender is a destructive fiction, taking down both ‘man’ and ‘civilization’ and ‘God’ and
        has been bolstered by the Vatican and the more conservative evangelical and apostolic churches
        on several continents, but also by neoliberals in France and elsewhere who need the normative
        family to absorb the decimation of social welfare. (Judith Butler responding to Jules Gleeson,
        7 September 2021)                                    
       The only way to counter this assault on gender, as they explain, is to build political resist-
       ance and solidarity amongst those political formations (e.g. anti-racist, abolitionist, trans,
       queer) that remain committed to the building of inclusive and non-violent worlds (Butler,
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      290                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      26 April 2023). As we have noted, one of the most challenging things for philosophers is
      to be able to say what they see. Judith Butler’s astute observations on contemporary
      gender politics do not just explain why there has been a rise in attacks on gender but also
      suggests the type of politics and political formations that we need to foster in order to
      resist these sustained attacks. The latter enables us to appreciate with fresh eyes how
      gender is formed (not just in relation to sex and sexuality but also in relation to capital,
      race and oppression) and that we cannot think of the subject in isolation – we need to
      think of it as a collective subject rather than just an intersectional one.2 What do I mean
      by this? Intersectional approaches teach us that subjects are not just racialized, gendered
      or classed, etc., but formed by a variety of identities (Crenshaw, 1989). The subject in
      these approaches is the outcome of all these identities. All subjects are intersectional in
      some way.                                              
        In contrast, a collective subjectivity is a subjectivity that is comprised of the alliances it
      has without necessarily possessing all the characteristics (e.g. gender, class, race, abilities)
      of the allied subjects. The difference between collective subjectivity and intersectional sub-
      jectivity lies in the fact that an intersectional subject is based on the idea that we possess
      certain characteristics (e.g. gender, race, class, age) which give us access to and help us
      understand the exclusions and injuries that we endure, whereas a collective subjectivity
      builds on the idea that we can keep fighting against these exclusions and injuries together
      without necessarily being shaped by them and given a fixed identity. A good contemporary
      example would be the global group Extinction Rebellion. The group is comprised of
      diverse subjectivities that may not share exactly the same experiences, but they came
      together and formed the group out of necessity to save our environment, and as such they
      have a collective subjectivity, which is identified by the name Extinction Rebellion.
        Butler (2015) has also written extensively about collective subjectivities in Notes
      Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly. In this book they reflect on the insurrections
      –Tahrir Square, Occupy Wall Street and so on – that took place in 2010 and 2011. Their
      account of these insurrections focuses on the subjectivities, politics and ethics that
      unfolded in the course of these uprisings. They describe the political subject as one that
      resists and rises against the precarious positions that it finds itself in and ultimately forms
      political alliances with other precarious subjects in an attempt to ameliorate the un-
      liveable conditions that envelop their lives. Butler explains how the subjectivities, poli-
      tics, and ethics that we witnessed during these uprisings are latent within our societies or
      ‘sometimes [are] actually . . . the structure of our own subject-formation’ (p. 68).
      Moreover, they remind us, the individual subject is neither bounded nor confined but a
      bundle of alliances or, as they write, ‘I am myself an alliance, or I ally with myself or my
      various cultural vicissitudes’. They remind us that social relationality is involved in the
      formation of the ‘I’ and identity is not fixed (p. 68). Or, to quote them, ‘the point is not
      [that] I am a collection of identities, but that I [am] already an assembly, even a general
      assembly, or an assemblage, as Jasbir Puar had adapted in terms of Gilles Deleuze’ (p.
      68).                                                   
        It is also important to note that their analysis of the collective subject of/in politics is
      more complex than the one offered by Arendt, who defined the political subject as the
      one that appears in public or becomes visible in public when people come together to
      discuss commonalities, contest injustices and claim rights. Politics, Arendt taught, is

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      291     
                                                             
       something that takes place in public, it is not a matter of the private realm. Reflecting on
       the way people come together to contest their political conditions, Notes Toward a
       Performative Theory of Assembly alludes to a different conception of politics. ‘[P]oli-
       tics’, Butler explains, ‘is not distinct from the private one, but it crosses those lines again
       and again, bringing attention to the way that politics is already in the home, or the street,
       or in the neighbourhood, or indeed in those virtual spaces that are equally unbound by the
       architecture of the house and the square’ (p. 71). They reiterate this point once more in
       an interview that they gave to Seeliger and Braslavsky (2022). This is an expansive
       understanding of politics, politics as process, and includes amongst other things the
       organizing and strategizing that may take place in homes or social media and enables us
       to see how ‘bodies in their plurality lay claim to the public, find and produce the public
       through seizing and reconfiguring the matter or material environments’ (Butler, 2015:
       71). As such, the ‘I’ that assembles or the assembly and collective subjectivity that comes
       together is supported not just by bodies, the bodies of the participants, but also by mate-
       rial objects – podiums, cars, barricades, tents, placards with relevant and humorous slo-
       gans –revealing an expansive collective subject that breaks away from the mind/body
       dichotomy more often associated with the subject. The subject in this case is not just
       embodied but formed by the material objects that support it.
       Bodies and Subversion                                 
       Judith Butler’s writing is impressive in that it draws our attention to limits, such us that
       of the body/mind dichotomy. The political subject, the collective political subject that we
       see in Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly, is one that breaks away from
       the body/mind dichotomy; it is embodied and supported by material objects. The col-
       lapse of the body/mind dichotomy is present in all of Butler’s works – the discursive
       subject is an embodied one, the senses and thinking are interlinked. The breaking of this
       dichotomy is patiently explained and explored in their essay ‘How Can I Deny that These
       Hands and This Body Are Mine?’ (Butler, 2001: 254–73,) where they offer their interpre-
       tation of Descartes’ ‘First Meditation: About the Things We May Doubt’ (Descartes,
       1968: 95–101). In this meditation Descartes sets out to demonstrate that the senses (or
       rather sensual experiences) cannot ground truthful or scientific knowledge and doubt
       enables the possibility of the formation of knowledge. Butler proposes that the ‘First
       Meditation’ reveals that Descartes’ mistrust of the body exposes a certain tension. On the
       one hand, he doubts the body and, on the other, ‘the very language through which he calls
       the body into question ends up reasserting the body as a condition of his own writing’ (p.
       258). In deconstructing Descartes, contrary to what he intended, they reveal that lan-
       guage acts, and that this very action returns the body as a figuration. At the same time,
       they are demonstrating that the figuration cannot wholeheartedly capture the materiality
       of the body. On the contrary, what we witness is a relationship between the figural, or the
       mind, and the body. Butler’s exquisite deconstruction of Descartes also acts as a rebuttal
       of the accusations that have been levied on them by feminist theorists such as Fraser
       (1997) that they ignore the material body and inequalities in their analysis of gender, thus
       reproducing the mind/body distinction.                
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      292                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
        I have demonstrated thus far how Butler’s philosophy reveals to us that the mind/body
      dichotomy is unsustainable. It has also been noted that the subject is not only embodied
      but also comes into being through the material environment that supports it. Whilst this
      is explicit in Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly, it can also be traced back
      to their earlier work, Bodies that Matter (Butler, 1993), particularly in the chapter
      ‘Gender Is Burning: Questions of Appropriation and Subversion’ (pp. 121–40). Butler
      critiques Althusser’s reading of interpellation that observes that subjects are subjugated
      and socialized via the hailing of the police officer and the law and suggests ways in
      which this very hailing can be disobeyed:              
        The law might not only be refused, but it might also be ruptured, forced into a rearticulation that
        calls into question the monotheistic force of its own unilateral operation. Where the uniformity
        of the subject is expected, where the behavioural conformity that subtly calls into question the
        legitimacy of the command, a repetition of the law into hyperbole, a rearticulation of the law
        against the authority of the one who delivers it. Here the performative, the call by the law which
        seeks to produce a lawful subject, produces a set of consequences that exceed and confound
        what appears to be the disciplining intention motivating the law. Interpellation thus loses its
        status as a simple performative, an act of discourse with the power to create that to which it
        refers and creates more than it ever meant to, signifying in excess of any intended referent.
        (Butler, 1993: 122)                                  
      As the quote above suggests, there are many possible ways of subverting the law. Whilst
      Butler does not overtly claim that material environments are supportive or play a role in
      the subversion of the law, we notice that this idea is subtly present in ‘Gender Is Burning’,
      when they turn to the film Paris Is Burning to discuss the subversive potential of drag
      performances. Paris Is Burning, a documentary film made by Jennie Livingston and
      filmed in the 1980s over several years, is a record of the drag balls that were taking place
      in Harlem at the time, and a commentary on queer life, sexuality, racism, music, com-
      munity building and responses to HIV/Aids and activism. The documentary film focuses
      on the preparations and the drag ball performances. Drag ball performers, Butler (1993)
      writes, were ‘“men” who [were] either African-American or Latino’ (p. 128). Butler
      (1993) explores the extent to which the drag balls succeeded in ‘denaturali[zing], sub-
      verting the “norm”’ (p. 129). As they explain, despite the energy and passion that went
      into the balls and drag performances, they may not have been as liberating as we may
      think. For example, some of the participants in the drag balls confess their desire for a
      heteronormative life. My point here is not to summarize the chapter but to point out that
      Butler recognizes early on that the drag performers in the film were supported in the
      process of denaturalizing the norm by material objects (it is immaterial whether or not
      they were successful): a range of styles of women’s clothing and make-up. The contest-
      ants, Butler (1993) explains, were not just trying to pass themselves off as real but also
      as real women in different roles: Ivy League students, executives and so on (p. 129). This
      is, of course, not to say that one performs gender through dressing, a common interpreta-
      tion of their work that they refute in the preface of Bodies that Matter (Butler, 1993: x),
      but rather to highlight that the idea ‘that bodies in their plurality lay claim to the public,
      find and produce the public through seizing and reconfiguring the matter or material
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      293     
                                                             
       environments’ (Butler, 2015: 71) was already present in their earlier writings. In ‘Gender
       Is Burning’, in particular, they explain how bodies take on cultural spaces, use material
       objects, clothing, make-up, in order to challenge the ‘monotheistic and unilateral’ (p.
       122) operations of law and gender norms but also to show us, or inadvertently reveal, the
       phantasmatic character of laws and norms.             
                                                             
       Ethical Contours                                      
       Butler’s subject is both political and ethical. In Together: The Rituals, Pleasures and
       Politics of Cooperation, Sennett (2013) reminds us that we respond with either sympathy
       or empathy to difficult situations (pp. 20–22). Both sentiments are, as he writes, steeped
       in cooperation. The person that responds sympathetically to a distressing situation – let’s
       say to the news of forest fires devastating their country – would simply identify with
       those in distress (Sennett, 2013: 21). The sympathetic person will recognize the distress
       that somebody near the fires is experiencing, identify with them and think of ways to
       help – in other words, reach out to help because they have identified or put themselves in
       the situation of those people. The empathetic person, on the other hand, recognizes that
       their situation is different and offers support despite themselves, or as Sennett (2013)
       puts it, ‘outside him- or herself’ (p. 21). Butler’s collective subject is empathetic, as
       Sennett describes, but is also somewhat anarchic, as I explain below.
        You may recall that in Butler’s essay ‘Ethical Ambivalence’ (Butler, 2000a) and their
       books Antigone’s Claim (Butler, 2000b) and Giving an Account of Oneself (Butler, 2003),
       ‘ethical ambivalence’ concerned itself mostly with drawing similarities between the eth-
       ics of Nietzsche and those of Levinas and evaluating their limits. Antigone’s Claim
       addressed the most common philosophical interpretations (Hegel, Lacan, Irigaray) that
       see Antigone, the protagonist of Sophocles’ tragedy of that name, as an ethical figure and
       points to the limitations of those interpretations.   
        In Giving an Account of Oneself (Butler, 2003) Butler offers us an account of their
       ethics and ethical subject. The book was published after the attack on the Twin Towers in
       New York by allegedly al-Qaeda terrorists and, since the lecture was given in the after-
       math of these attacks, they provide us with an account of the responsible and ethical
       subject within this context. In the first chapter of the book they set the scene in which
       ethical questions emerge:                             
        It may be that the question of ethics emerges precisely at the limits of the schemes of
        intelligibility, the site where we ask ourselves what it might mean to continue in a dialogue
        where no common ground can be assumed, where one is, as it were, at the limits of what one
        knows and still under the demand to offer and receive recognition. (Butler, 2003: 18)
       As you can see from the quote above, they consider it necessary to think about the param-
       eters of liveable and viable lives within the very conditions of their impossibility, where
       no common ground or foundation can be assumed. These words can be contextualized in
       different ways. They could refer to ‘unresolvable’ fallings out between friends, lovers,
       colleagues, or the Palestinian–Israeli conflict, the animosity that exists between India
       and Pakistan, and so forth. However, it would be misleading to think that the above is
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      294                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      prescriptive. Rather, it is a description of the way in which the subject constitutes itself
      and its relation to the world.                         
        Overall, Butler (2003) sets out to ‘revise recognition as an ethical project’ (p. 35). The
      concept of recognition, as we know from their analysis of the Phenomenology of Spirit
      (Hegel, 2004), produces a subject through its externality; it needs the Other – whether
      this Other takes the form of an individual, language, the state, or community – to simply
      exist and be alive. Moreover, they explain that the subject’s desire for autonomy is over-
      ridden by the desire to stay alive. They find the concept of recognition useful because it
      makes the subject the outcome of the agonistic relationship between the subject and its
      social and cultural spheres. This is where their account of ethics, the subject and respon-
      sibility begin in Giving an Account of Oneself. The ‘I’ (subject), as they write, ‘has no
      story of its own that is not at once a story of a relation – or asset of relations to – a set of
      norms’ (Butler, 2003: 12). This ‘I’ then, by the very fact that it exists within a social
      realm, is never in possession of its ‘I’ or its being. In this sense, the ‘I’ is an essence. For
      Butler, the ‘I’ is also never outside the conditions of its emergence. However, this does
      not mean that the ‘I’ does not acquire or possess agency or any ethical grounds. On the
      contrary, it means that this provokes the ‘I’ to deliberate upon the conditions of its socia-
      bility and thus to evaluate its surrounding values (Butler, 2003: 12–13). For Butler, ethics
      emerges as the space for critical evaluation of social and cultural norms, and the ‘I’ can
      achieve this through deliberating on the conditions that make its life unliveable.
      Moreover, in the same book, they explain that the ‘I’ is supported by the Other whilst the
      Other remains singular and non-identical to the ‘I’. As we have seen, the ‘I’ which comes
      into being through the Other can never account fully and coherently for him/herself. The
      concept that the ‘I’ is supported for its existence by the Other reminds us of the mutual
      ethic that the anarchist thinker and activist Kropotkin in Mutual Aid (2009), first pub-
      lished in 1902, identified as being present in the human, animal and plant worlds.
      Kropotkin’s book is a critique of the narrow interpretations of Charles Darwin’s Descent
      of Man, which emphasized the importance of competition and the survival of the fittest
      in his writing and ignored Darwin’s reference to mutual support as a way of having live-
      able lives. Kropotkin methodically follows this ethic and explains that survival, growth
      and liveability work best through a mutual aid ethic.  
        Somewhat counterintuitively, Butler’s ethical subject also shares some affinities with
      the work of the anarchist thinker Max Stirner. In Ego and Its Own, Stirner (2006) sug-
      gested that we can only become free and anarchic if, as subjects, we manage to possess
      ourselves. Only then will we be able to engage and support each other and not enslave
      ourselves to each other or ideas. He proposed that a possible way of doing this is to
      detach ourselves from qualities and institutions (including the state) through a sustained
      process of critiquing such attachments, which he calls ‘own criticism’ (Stirner, 2006:
      310). Although he does not provide us with any example of criticism or thinking that may
      emanate from itself, he invites us to think about it in antithesis to thinking and criticism
      that emanates from a presupposition (state, religion, love, etc.), which tends to be dog-
      matic and static. ‘Own criticism’ could perhaps be the type of thinking that brackets out
      any ideology. Own criticism considers that we can only be unique individuals when we
      free ourselves from ideological positions and relate to one another as unique individuals.
      For example, in order to be a free subject, and moreover a subject that is able to offer

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      295     
                                                             
       support to the other without enslaving them, as an anarchist I need to rid myself of even
       the ideological positions of anarchism. Butler’s subject that acts after having rid them-
       selves of any ideological positions that may stop them from contributing to the liberation
       and creation of a better world resembles Stirner’s call for anarchism. The ethical subject,
       as we have seen, is one that undertakes a rigorous critique of themself, and simultane-
       ously is supported by the Other. For the most part, Stirner has been interpreted as provid-
       ing us with an individualist subject, an egoist that is not formed by the environment that
       surrounds them, and does not align at first glance with the ethical subject developed by
       Butler, a subject that is dispossessed of one self (Butler, 2000a; Butler and Athanasiou,
       2013), but they nevertheless share the desire to critique presuppositions that hinder coop-
       eration and the development of freer and more liveable worlds. Perhaps the post-Hege-
       lian Stirner has something to learn from Butler’s radical re-interpretation of Hegel about
       the possibility of critiquing oneself or being an own critique without needing to create a
       solitary and somewhat lonely ethical subject, a more appealing and necessary proposi-
       tion that Butler brings to the fore.                  
        Butler (2013) is not, of course, an anarchist, though they are well aware of anarchist
       research, activism and solidarity actions. In their essay ‘Palestine, State Politics and the
       Anarchist Impasse’ (pp. 203–23), they write about the possibilities of better sociality and
       the freedoms offered by non-state activist groups like Anarchists Against the Wall (an
       Israeli direct action group that opposes the Occupation and Israeli settlements in Palestine)
       and the Palestinian struggle for self-determination and statehood. In this essay Butler
       makes complimentary comments about the actions of Anarchists Against the Wall, who are
       mainly Israeli citizens, because of their support for the Palestinians and their courage.
       However, Butler asks us to note there is a paradox; although Anarchists Against the Wall
       are anti-statist, they have not rescinded their Israeli citizenship and the Palestinians who are
       being supported by this anarchist organization still want to have a state. In doing so they
       don’t just warn us that the anarchist political positions may not align 100% with the
       Palestinian people but also that perhaps there is still something in the idea of the state that
       needs to be saved. Though the essay focuses mainly on anarchist politics, the idea of mutual
       aid and support that they recount in the essay, and are complimentary of, align precisely
       with anarchist ethics. Ideas about an ethics of solidarity, cooperation and support are
       repeated in Notes toward a Performative Theory of Assembly (Butler, 2015: 99–122) and
       Parting Ways: Jewishness and the Critique of Zionism (Butler, 2012a), bringing to the fore
       once more the idea of an ethical subject who is supported, if not constituted, by the Other.
       In no way am I trying to turn Judith Butler into an anarchist thinker. The scope of reading
       their work along anarchist ideas of ethics is the result of my desire to show the generative
       facet of their work, and its ability to address emerging events (9/11, the Occupy movement,
       anti-trans crusades, Palestine and so forth).         
       Five Themes: Feminism, Subjectivity, Performativity,  
       Bodies, Vulnerability/Precarity                       
       I hope I have been able to show you how interlinked Judith Butler’s political and ethical
       subjects are and how vibrant and able their writing is in providing us with a philosophical
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      296                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      assessment of the political, social and ethical demands of our times. I don’t think it is an
      exaggeration to say that if we want to avoid the economic, climate, social and political
      crises that surround us we need to be able to work together collectively, despite or at the
      limits of ourselves, and be able to forge political alliances that are anti-authoritarian,
      open and enable human, animal and nature to flourish. Since Gender Trouble, Butler has
      been addressing the limitations placed upon our existence (materially and discursively)
      and been able to point out possible ways of escaping these limitations without, of course,
      offering a blueprint. It is no surprise that academic scholars, activists and mere citizens
      have engaged creatively and critically with their ideas. I will turn now to a series of writ-
      ings, interviews and essays by Butler, and academic articles and book reviews written by
      fellow academics that engage with their work and have been published in Theory, Culture
      & Society and Body & Society over the years.           
        I have divided the contributions that I selected into five themes, though as I noted
      earlier it is impossible to fully categorize Butler’s work into themes as the themes tend
      to be interrelated and interconnected. For example, their understanding of politics is
      closely intertwined with that of ethics, and whilst their understanding of subject forma-
      tion relies on the linguistic theory of performativity, Butler’s understanding of performa-
      tivity is not abstract, discursive, or cultural; rather, it is embodied and material. I am only
      highlighting this here because I want us to be aware that these five themes –feminism,
      subjectivity, bodies, performativity, and vulnerability/precarity – are interlinked. I now
      turn to these themes.                                  
      Feminism                                               
      Judith Butler’s Gender Trouble, as already noted, offers a critique of certain forms of
      feminism whilst being a feminist themself. More specifically, Butler ‘writing in the tradi-
      tion of immanent critique . . . [sought] to provoke a critical examination of the basic
      vocabulary of the [feminist] movement of thought’ (Butler, 1999b: vii) without necessar-
      ily wanting to undermine the movement but rather wishing to address potentially exclu-
      sive vocabularies and practices. As they explain:      
        I opposed those regimes of truth that stipulated that certain kinds of gendered expressions were
        found to be false or derivative, and others, true and original. The point was not to prescribe a
        new gendered way of life that might then serve as a model for readers of the text. Rather, the
        aim of the text was to open up the field of possibility of gender without dictating which kinds
        of possibilities ought to be realized. One might wonder what use ‘opening up possibilities’
        finally is, but no one who has understood what it is to live in the social world as what is
        ‘impossible’, illegible, unrealizable, unreal and illegitimate is likely to pose that question.
        (Butler, 1999b: viii)                                
      Feminist theories – contrary to their calling for equality and justice for women and eman-
      cipation of all from patriarchy – remained attached to the heterosexual matrix, with the
      result that the categories of woman, lesbians and trans women were excluded. Butler chal-
      lenged these feminist theories, pointing to the disjunction between the feminist ideas and
      their practices. One of the important points that Butler makes in Gender Trouble is that
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      297     
                                                             
       subjects are not static; they are constantly changing or forming, and therefore any fixed and
       normative understanding of subjectivity risks creating exclusions and makes the lives of
       the excluded unliveable. The category ‘woman’ is still a contested term, with gender criti-
       cal feminists conserving the category of woman to biologically born women (an odd phrase
       to pen) and excluding trans women from this category. Butler’s response has been the same
       since 1989: to challenge and critique feminisms that are exclusionary. Feminist exclusions
       are central to Hughes and Witz’s (1997) article included in the feminist theme. This article
       from 1997 is quite representative of the theoretical questions that academics across the
       Global North brought to the writings of Judith Butler. The authors engage with Butler via
       Simone de Beauvoir’s discussions of gender and sex. Like Butler in Gender Trouble, they
       welcome de Beauvoir’s critique of feminisms that associate gender with biology whilst
       simultaneously being critical of de Beauvoir’s understanding of the body. In her attempt to
       demonstrate that one cannot be reduced to one’s biology, that women are not born as such
       but rather become so, Hughes and Witz argue that de Beauvoir pathologizes the body, pre-
       dominantly reducing it to its reproductive capacities. They write that Butler’s feminism, on
       the other hand, focuses on the desiring body, reminding us that women are not merely
       reproductive bodies. Whilst they welcome Butler’s critique of de Beauvoir’s theory of
       gender formation, they simultaneously critique Butler for being over discursive and inad-
       vertently excluding ‘real’ experiences that women emanate from their bodies. This is a very
       common critique that is made in relation to Butler’s understanding of gender and, by exten-
       sion, their feminism. McNay (2003), on the other hand, critiques the evaluation of
       Habermasian feminists, like Seyla Benhabib, of Butler’s agentic subject and consequently
       their version of feminism. As McNay writes:           
        In Benhabib’s view, the poststructural view of the unified subject as a discursive effect is far too
        abstract to provide an adequate account of agency. Agency is regarded as a property of language
        conceived as an abstract structure, rather than as pragmatically oriented speech between
        individuals. The possibility of linguistic agency in Derrida, for example, is linked to the
        reiterative structure of language itself. When this essentially structural account of agency is
        generalized, as it is in Butler’s idea of ‘performative resignification’, it is unable to answer the
        question ‘How does anyone know, that such resignification and reinterpretation have taken
        place?’ (Benhabib, 1999: 340; Osborne and Segal, 1994). This conception of agency as an
        abstract potential connected to the reiterative structure of speech does not adequately address
        ideas of intention, reflexivity, and attendant notions of validity against which the political
        legitimacy of a given speech act can be assessed. (McNay, 2003: 2)
       McNay’s understanding of agency is closer to that of Butler and to Butler’s feminism. In
       agreeing with Butler she explains that ‘the coherent, rational subject does not exist . . .
       in some pure sense prior to action, but emerges through time as an effect of the repeated
       reworking of sedimented linguistic conventions’ (p. 3). McNay, like Butler, shows that if
       feminism is to remain a liberatory project, it needs/has to shift its understanding of sub-
       jects having agency before they act and recognize that agency emerges through action.
       In reminding us via Butler that agency is not always already there, that there is no inten-
       tionality prior to action, McNay points to the limits of the construction of woman in
       Habermasian feminism, but also in feminisms that want to adorn women with pre-exist-
       ing agency.                                           
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      298                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
        We may wonder why ‘empowering’ women with pre-existing agency is problematic.
      If we stick with the argument that women, or all subjects, have a pre-existing agency or
      intentionality we run into two problems: (a) the impossibility of tracking such intention-
      ality and (b) entrapping subjectivity into a kind of stasis, with the result that only certain
      subjects are recognized as belonging to this category, i.e. biological women, and not
      emerging subjectivities, i.e. trans women. Woman’s subjectivity and subjectivity more
      generally is never static, but is always in movement; furthermore, different environments
      and times expose different aspects of women and their actions in the world. Vasilaki’s
      (2016) essay, which situates Butler’s feminist writings within debates on post-secular-
      ism, is the third piece that I have chosen to include in the feminist theme. Such debates
      critique secularism as the platform for feminist politics. Whilst Butler is critical of secu-
      larism, pointing to its exclusionary logic, Vasilaki is sceptical of Butler’s critique.
      Vasilaki suggests that Butler’s analysis renders indistinguishable secular values and reli-
      gious values. It is quite difficult to follow Vasilaki’s critique of Butler’s critique of secu-
      larism; so-called Western ‘secular’ states have explicitly aligned themselves with certain
      religions, such as Christianity, to the exclusion of other faiths (mainly Islam) or com-
      munity values. Such alliances reveal, as Butler and others have argued, that secularism
      has become an ideology that protects certain populations to the detriment and exclusion
      of others. I fear that although Vasilaki may be right to warn us of the limits of our cri-
      tiques of secularism, at the same time she may fall into the trap of promoting a certain
      feminist engagement with religion that may be exclusive and in total opposition to some
      of the aspirations of feminism, inclusivity, democratization and being open to the future.
      My aim here is not to be critical of the contributions I have chosen but rather to present
      you with the way in which academics over the years have engaged with Butler’s critique
      of feminism.                                           
      Subjectivity                                           
      As discussed, we cannot talk about Judith Butler’s work without all the themes merging
      into one another. When we looked at the theme of feminism, we paid particular attention
      to their critique of feminism and how academics engaged with it. Questions such as ‘Is
      Butler’s critique of certain feminisms able to represent all the experiences of the gendered
      subject?’ and ‘Is it inclusive?’ are central to such discussions. When we are discussing
      Butler’s understanding of the subject/subjectivity we shift our focus away from the gen-
      eral debates about how subjects are framed in feminist discourses to how Butler articu-
      lates the formation of the subject. Butler’s understanding of subject formation has been
      influenced by a number of philosophical perspectives – Hegelian phenomenology,
      Lacanian psychoanalysis and post-structuralism (Derrida, Foucault) – and we witness
      early glimpses of their understanding of subject formation in their book Subjects of Desire
      (Butler, 1999a). We know, for example, that the subject in certain philosophical traditions
      was adorned with specific characteristics: being rational, disembodied, and static. Butler
      was attracted to Hegel’s concept of the subject primarily because it is linked to a desire
      and therefore produces an embodied subject (Taylor, 1999: 144). Indeed, fundamental to
      their understanding of the Hegelian subject is the question of recognition and its relation-
      ship to desire (Butler, 1999a: xiv). Butler provides us with a powerful understanding of
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      299     
                                                             
       the subject and subject formation via Hegel. For Hegel the process of recognition, recog-
       nizing ourselves, takes place through an encounter with the other. In our encounter with
       the other we recognize who we are by recognizing what we are not. I am A becomes I am
       not B. This process of recognition also shows us that we are dependent on others for self-
       recognition, and we realize that if we are to become fully autonomous subjects, we will
       have to annihilate the other. Butler’s interpretation of the master slave dialectic suggests
       that we realize that if we annihilate the other, our self-identification will be jeopardized,
       therefore we choose to spare the other’s life. The fact that their interpretation of the
       Hegelian subject is central to their understanding of subjectivity reveals an understanding
       of a process that produces a subject, constituted externally, embodied, and interdependent
       on the other for their existence where their desire for survival overrides the urge to anni-
       hilate the other. This subject is also lacking or their wholeness is always dependent on the
       other, whether that other is another person, history, or culture, etc.
        The three essays included under the theme of subjectivity reflect on the relationship
       with and effects of desire, recognition, and loss on the subject (Butler, 2004a), question
       how an interdependent subject gains agency (McNay, 1999) and how, by disrupting the
       Cartesian subject, an embodied subject is carved with the potential to identify itself
       (Boyne, 1999). Reflecting on the psychoanalyst and artist Bracha Ettinger’s understand-
       ing of subjectivity, Butler notes that our subjectivity can also be formed by a past that
       does not belong to us:                                
        by an unknowable history of trauma, the trauma that others who precede us have lived through
        and, on the other hand, the very sites in which a new possibility of visual experience emerges,
        one which establishes a temporality in which the past is not past, but is not present, in which the
        present emerges, but from the scattered and animated remains of a continuing, not continuing,
        trauma. (Butler, 2004a 97)                           
       Their engagement with Ettinger’s subject formation is exemplary of Butler’s deep
       engagement with contemporary thinkers and their own perspective on subjectivity,
       which, as I have already described, is embodied, collective and always interdependent.
       Performativity                                        
                                                             
       Gender performativity is a practice of citationality, through which discourse produces
       bodies ‘as already sexed’ (Ahmed, 1998: 113), that is as having a sex prior to one’s nam-
       ing. As you can see from the above, language and, more specifically, a critical analysis
       of the way language operates is at the centre of Butler’s method.
        Butler (1990) introduces the concept of gender performativity in Gender Trouble.
       However, the most interesting manifestation and citation of this concept takes place in
       their subsequent books, Bodies that Matter (Butler, 1993) and Excitable Speech (Butler,
       1997) (in this latter book they use primarily their own concept of performativity as it
       emerges from gender performativity). Their concept of performativity in general – a
       radical variation on Austin’s theory of performativity – has been used by them to explain
       how gender is formed, how racist, sexist, and hate speech operate and how institutions in
       general exclude, torture, and terrorize individuals and construct them as the enemy
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      300                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      (Butler, 2004b). The term ‘performativity’ is a linguistic term that Butler takes from
      Austin (1962) and Derrida (1992, 2000) and adapts to gender. I have written about
      (Loizidou, 2007: 26–37) Butler’s critique of the essays on performativity by Austin and
      Derrida elsewhere, and these are brilliantly described by Bell (2006) and Rothenberg
      (2006) in the performativity theme.                    
        I would like to revisit a few things about Butler’s own concept of gender performativity.
      As I noted earlier, for them, gender performativity is understood as a citational practice
      whereby it produces the ‘subject as already sexed’. Nevertheless, this citational practice is
      fantasmatic; it creates the illusion that the subject pre-exists its calling into being, its cita-
      tion. Gender performativity becomes the practice by which genders are constituted as
      materially intelligible. In other words, gender performativity produces as intelligible those
      genders that ‘institute and maintain relations of coherence and continuity among sex, gen-
      der, sexual practice, and desire’ (Butler, 1993: 17); it produces ‘subjects as already sexed’
      in order to sustain intelligible genders and, thus, maintain the hegemony of heterosexuality.
      This comes into effect through the foreclosure or disavowal of identifications that are not
      intelligible. Such identities are produced as ‘abject beings’, beings that are not yet subjects
      (Butler, 1993: 3), although Butler (1993) argues that the ‘abject’ subject remains ‘“inside”
      the subject as its own founding repudiation’ (p. 3). Thus, the ‘abject’ is not outside the
      ‘subject’ but is rather part of its foundation; that which is refuted or disavowed in order for
      a subject identification to take place. The ‘abject’ that is internal to the foundation of the
      subject is of primary importance in Butler’s work because it helps to demonstrate the limits
      of gender performativity and also opens up ways in which embodiment can be reconfig-
      ured through these limits. Gender performativity becomes the practice through which we
      realize that we are not necessarily what heteronormative cultures want us to be but rather
      we can become the subjects that we want to become, through a series of acts or recitations
      that bring us into being (Butler, 1993: 2–4).          
        The essays that are included in this theme draw our attention to a series of problematiza-
      tions produced by gender performativity, and performativity as used by Butler in subse-
      quent works. These problematizations evolve around what happens to the agency of the
      subject if it lacks intentionality (Campbell and Harbord, 1999; Lloyd, 1999), the relation-
      ship of the voice to performative discursive practices and how it contributes to the forma-
      tion of the gendered subject (Schlichter, 2011), how Butler’s analysis of performative
      speech acts is influenced by psychoanalysis (Lovell, 2003), how Butler’s psychoanalytic
      understanding of subject formation enables us to subvert existing gender norms (Campbell
      and Harbord, 1999: 229–39) and, finally, to what extent and how gender performativity can
      address ecological theories that address the environment rather than the human (Bell,
      2012). Even when sharply critical, all the papers talk of the possibilities that Butler’s con-
      cept of performativity provide by thinking about the limits of theoretical paradigms and
      creating better ways of being with each other.         
      Bodies                                                 
      Bodies are at the heart of Judith Butler’s philosophical analysis. We have seen earlier
      how Butler’s conception of the body is not just discursive but also material. We have also
      noted that when, for example, they are talking about uprisings and demonstrations in
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      301     
                                                             
       both Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly and ‘Palestine, State Politics and
       the Anarchist Impasse’, they have at the forefront of their thinking the risks that bodies
       take in transforming political terrains. This sustained interest in bodies, particularly gen-
       der and sexed bodies, is not only evidenced in Gender Trouble and Bodies that Matter
       but also in their essay ‘Revisiting Bodies and Pleasures’ (Butler, 1999c), published in
       Theory, Culture & Society and which I have included here. We have already seen that
       Butler considers the subject to be both embodied and desiring, a philosophical move that
       disrupts Cartesian philosophy. Butler’s philosophical tradition is always in critical con-
       versation with other philosophers and thinkers. One thinker that they have engaged with
       is Michel Foucault. In ‘Revisiting Bodies and Pleasures’ they consider Foucault’s call for
       more thinking and reflections on ‘pleasures and bodies’, aimed at breaking away from
       the usual thought pattern of identifying sexuality with sexed bodies. In the essay Butler
       carefully shows that Foucault’s proposition, which he repudiated later on, risks propos-
       ing that: (a) ‘sexuality is pervasively structured by sexual difference’ (Butler, 1999c: 20);
       (b) pleasures are processed through sexual difference; (c) power has an effect on bodies;
       and (d) desire is opaque. In highlighting the effects of Foucault’s call for more research
       on ‘pleasure and bodies’, Butler’s reflective essay points out the dangers of studying
       gender and sexuality in the vacuum of a power analysis.
        The other essays that form part of this theme either critique Butler’s understanding of
       how bodies are constituted and affected or use Butler’s concept to point to the limitations
       of theories of sexuality. Sylvester (1998) is critical of Butler’s understanding of the rela-
       tionship between power and bodies, as shown in their reading of Richard Reeves’
       President Kennedy: Profile of Power and Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale that
       bodies may be neither resistant nor compliant or abject. Hird (2002) critiques Butler’s
       use of Freudian psychoanalysis in relation to sexual identification and finds it fails to
       understand that homosexuality is not an identification. Chambers (2007) revisits discus-
       sions on discursive and material bodies and succinctly remarks how Butler neither repro-
       duces the body/mind distinction nor do they ignore the material body, while Fraser
       (1999), going along with Butler’s understanding of gender formation and bodily identi-
       fication, questions the separation of gender, race, class, ethnicity, and sexuality from
       their analysis of bodies. And finally, Meagher (2007) compares Butler’s understanding
       of bodily citationality with the work of the artist Cindy Sherman, known for undoing her
       identity through her photography. Butler’s understanding of bodily formations has influ-
       enced academic writings in a variety of disciplines, from sociology (Bell and Frazer) to
       political theory (Lloyd and Chambers) to the arts (Meagher), to name but a few.
       Vulnerability/Precarity                               
       In his engagement with Judith Butler’s concept of the body, Chambers (2007) compli-
       ments them for stressing that bodies ‘are vulnerable’ and ‘both dependent upon others
       and subject to violation by another, by others’ (Chambers, 2007: 49). The connection
       between precarity and vulnerability is central to Butler’s overview of bodies, subjects
       and pressing social problems. We have seen earlier in our discussion of Butler’s ethics
       that their ethical subject is one that recognizes that it depends upon the other for recogni-
       tion and survival. The words vulnerability and precarity were not of course present in
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      302                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      those early writings, but we can speculate that Butler’s understanding of the ethical sub-
      ject in those earlier writings is somehow a precursor to the exploration of Butler’s con-
      cept of vulnerability in their ethical and political writings. Indeed, we could say that
      these two terms expand the connection between politics and ethics. In Precarious Life:
      The Powers of Mourning and Violence (Butler, 2004b), reflecting on the 9/11 attacks and
      state responses to them, Butler reviews how we respond to injurious events, how we
      embrace (or not) mourning, and the possibility of always being injured and injuring oth-
      ers (Butler, 2004b: xii). Moreover, Butler notes that vulnerability is not equally distrib-
      uted (Butler, 2004b: xii) and that it is vitally important to consider and ‘reflect upon
      injury, to find out the mechanisms of its distribution, to find out who else suffers from
      permeable borders, unexpected violence, dispossession, and fear’ (Butler, 2004b: xii).
        In rearticulating injury in terms of vulnerability, Butler unravels the myth of sover-
      eign self-mastery and its promise of security, without of course suggesting that an equi-
      librium in the event of a breach of state security can be reached by violent counter attacks.
      Instead, Precarious Life acts as a reminder that violence is perpetrated precisely because
      states hold onto this myth of sovereignty and self-mastery. They return to the theme of
      precarious life and vulnerability in Parting Ways: Jewishness and the Critique of Zionism
      (Butler, 2012a), Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly (Butler, 2015) and in
      their essay ‘Rethinking Vulnerability in Resistance’ (Butler, 2016). ‘Precarious Life,
      Vulnerability and the Ethics of Cohabitation’ (Butler, 2012b) is an expansive essay that
      re-evaluates Levinas’s ethical philosophy premised on vulnerability and Arendt’s con-
      cept of cohabitation. In this essay Butler explains that the concept of precarity, or to be
      precise, that life is precarious, pertains to the precarious conditions of life, e.g. losing
      your home or your country due to war or natural disaster, becoming unemployed, not
      having a home, food, or health care, etc.              
        The discussion of vulnerability, on the other hand, emerges in relation to Levinas’s
      understanding of ethical responsibility. Levinas’s ethics propose that when a vulnerable
      Other calls for our support or help we are obliged to offer our support, which is not based
      on the requirement for reciprocity (Butler, 2012b: 140), and, furthermore, ‘the Other has
      priority’ (Butler, 2012b: 140). Levinas’s ethical subject sustains an idea of a bounded
      subject, one that differentiates between the one that responds to the call for help and sup-
      port and the one that asks for support. As a result, they fail to recognize firstly that the
      subject is embodied but also that it is not bounded but constituted by the Other. Butler
      agrees with Levinas that self-preservation cannot be the premise for ethics, but also
      argues, as they did in An Account of Oneself when discussing ethics, that the vulnerable
      subject is linked to us:                               
        In my view (which surely is not mine alone) the life of the other, the life that is not our own, is
        also our life, since whatever is ‘our’ life is derived precisely from this sociality, this being
        already, and from the start, dependent on a world of others, constituted in and by a social world.
        In this way there are surely others distinct from me whose ethical claim upon me is irreducible
        to an egoistic calculation on my part. But that is because we are, however distinct, also bound
        to one another and to living processes that exceed human form. . . . To find that one’s life is also
        the life of others, even as this life is distinct and must be distinct, means that one’s boundary is
        at once a limit and a site of adjacency, a mode of spatial and temporal nearness and even
        boundness. (Butler, 2012b: 141)                      

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      303     
                                                             
        Butler has a rather complex understanding of vulnerability. They recognize the vul-
       nerability of the Other as a result of being interlinked with us, binding us to the Other.
       The question of vulnerability arises in their work not just in relation to ethics and respon-
       sibility but also in relation to politics and, particularly, in relation to the politics of resist-
       ance. In the essay ‘Rethinking Vulnerability in Resistance’, they consider the
       infrastructures of support, including bodily support, which we have in demonstrations,
       uprisings, moments of resistance. In this essay Butler moves from vulnerability as a
       ‘subjective disposition’ (Butler, 2016: 25) to vulnerability as a relational disposition. If
       we are supported by people and material infrastructures (barricades, placards, streets,
       social media) in acts of resistance, they invite us to see that we are not truly masters of
       ourselves, and that political transformations can be achieved precisely when we recog-
       nize that we are not bounded sovereign subjects. Therefore
        vulnerability is a kind of relationship that belongs to that ambiguous region in which receptivity
        and responsiveness are not clearly separable from one another, and not distinguished as separate
        moments and sequences; indeed, where receptivity and responsiveness become the basis for
        mobilizing vulnerability rather than engaging in its destructive denial. (Butler, 2016: 25)
        Indeed, in this essay Judith Butler insists that vulnerability can be the premise for a
       politics that moves us away from violence and destruction towards cooperation and sup-
       port and the creation of better worlds and conditions precisely because we are supported
       by each other and infrastructures. In the interview they gave to Bell (2010), Butler
       explains that they came to think about the promise of invulnerability and its conse-
       quences as a result of the US response to 9/11, of the differential distribution of vulner-
       ability revealed in those responses (US citizens should have maximum protection while
       others less). Butler finds ways of undoing the normalization of ‘differential vulnerabil-
       ity’. We have seen how their reconceptualization of vulnerability as the infrastructure for
       creating social and political relations is based on cooperation and collective missions.
       Agreeing with Butler and in line with their ideas of vulnerability, Velicu and García-
       López (2018) consider how theories of the commons align with ideas of vulnerability.
       Pfingst and Rosengarten (2012) use Butler’s understanding of precarity and photography
       to reveal how medical infrastructure is blocked from reaching the Occupied Palestinian
       Territories. Butler’s problematizations on precarity and vulnerability find their way into
       so many of our contemporary writings, and the essays selected here are examples of
       precisely this.                                       
        Judith Butler’s writings, thinking and philosophy have been influential in many aca-
       demic fields, and in many spheres of life. What I have brought to the fore here is a snap-
       shot of this, a snapshot that can be supplemented by others over the years. In re-reading
       some of their work, I was impressed by their use of questions. Questions make their
       appearance in almost all their writings, a way of giving their reader a breathing space to
       digest what has gone before, but also a way of opening us up to different ways of articu-
       lating, thinking and imagining the social, philosophical and political impasses that we
       may be encountering. The question is also a way of reminding us that we cannot solve
       problems alone but that we are not bounded, isolated individuals but rather that we are
       collective subjectivities that can only forge the future together. Can we sustain such a
       reminder? A question for all to think and act on together.
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      304                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      Elena Loizidou https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4068-8420   
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. Butler (26 April 2023) ‘Who’s Afraid of Gender?: Judith Butler’s Public Lecture at the
        University of Cambridge’. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yD6UukSbAMs
        (accessed 23 June 2023). The themes and analysis in this lecture form part of their excellent
        book, Who’s Afraid of Gender? (Butler, 2024).        
      2. Collective subjectivity is a subjectivity that is constituted by the alliances it has without nec-
        essarily possessing the characteristics (e.g. gender, class, race, abilities) of those political
        alliances. Intersectional politics keep hold of the idea that we possess certain characteristics
        (gender, race, class, age, etc.) that can provide us access and understanding to the exclusions
        and injuries that we have. It is important to note that Judith Butler is in alignment with inter-
        sectional feminism, and so am I. Nevertheless, here I note a slight difference in the structure
        of Judith Butler’s thinking that make it closer to the idea of collective subjectivity. We can say
        that an intersectional subjectivity needs to be embraced and enables a collective one.
      References                                             
      Ahmed, Sara (1998) Differences that Matter: Feminist Theory and Postmodernism. Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.                          
      Austin, John Langshaw (1962) How to Do Things with Words. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
      Bell, Vikki (1999) Mimesis as cultural survival: Judith Butler and anti-semitism. Theory, Culture
        & Society 16(2): 133–161.                            
      Bell, Vikki (2006) Performative knowledge. Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3): 214–217.
      Bell, Vikki (2007) Book review: Who Sings the Nation-State?, by Judith Butler and Gayatri
        Spivak, Calcutta: Seagull Books, 2007, pp. 121. Theory, Culture & Society 26(5): 151–156.
      Bell, Vikki (2010) New scenes of vulnerability, agency and plurality: An interview with Judith
        Butler. Theory, Culture & Society 27(1): 130–152.    
      Bell, Vikki (2012) Declining performativity: Butler, Whitehead and ecologies of concern. Theory,
        Culture & Society 29(2): 107–123.                    
      Boyne, Roy (1999) Citation and subjectivity: Towards a return of the embodied will. Body &
        Society 5(2–3): 209–225.                             
      Butler, Judith (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Butler, Judith (1993) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex’. London: Routledge.
      Butler, Judith (1997) Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative. London: Routledge.
      Butler, Judith (1999a) Subjects of Desire: Hegelian Reflection in Twentieth-Century France. New
        York: Columbia University Press.                     
      Butler, Judith (1999b) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Butler, Judith (1999c) Revisiting Bodies and Pleasures. Theory, Culture & Society 16(2): 11–20.
      Butler, Judith (2000a) Ethical ambivalence. In: Marjorie Garber, Beatrice Hanssen, & Rebecca
        Walkowitz (eds) The Turn to Ethics. New York: Routledge, pp. 15–18.
      Butler, Judith (2000b) Antigone’s Claim: Kinship Between Life and Death. New York: Columbia
        University Press.                                    
      Butler, Judith (2001) How can I deny that these hands and this body are mine? In: Tom Cohen,
        Barbara Cohen & J. Hillis Miller (eds) Material Events: Paul de Man and the Afterlife of
        Theory. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 254–273.

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      305     
                                                             
       Butler, Judith (2003) Giving an Account of Oneself. Assen: Koninklijke Van Gorcum.
       Butler, Judith (2004a) Bracha’s Eurydice. Theory, Culture & Society 21(1): 95–100.
       Butler, Judith (2004b) Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence. London: Verso.
       Butler, Judith (2009) Frames of War: When Is Life Grievable? London: Verso.
       Butler, Judith (2012a) Parting Ways: Jewishness and the Critique of Zionism. New York: Columbia
         University Press.                                   
       Butler, Judith (2012b) Precarious life, vulnerability and the ethics of cohabitation. The Journal of
         Speculative Philosophy 26(2): 134–151.              
       Butler, Judith (2013) Palestine, state politics and the anarchist impasse. In: Blumenfeld, Jacob,
         Bottici, Chiara, and Critchley, Simon (eds) The Anarchist Turn. London: Pluto Press,
         pp. 203–223.                                        
       Butler, Judith (2015) Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University Press.                                   
       Butler, Judith (2016) Rethinking vulnerability and resistance. In: Butler, Judith, Gambetti, Zeynep,
         and Sabsay, Leticia (eds) Vulnerability in Resistance. Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
         pp. 12–27.                                          
       Butler, Judith (2020) The Force of Non-Violence. London: Verso.
       Butler, Judith (2023) Who’s afraid of gender?: Judith Butler’s public lecture at University of
         Cambridge, 26 April. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yD6UukSbAMs
         (accessed 23 June 2023).                            
       Butler, Judith (2024) Who’s Afraid of Gender? London: Allen Lane.
       Butler, Judith and Athanasiou, Athena (2013) Dispossession: The Perfomative in the Political.
         Cambridge: Polity Press.                            
       Campbell, Jan and Harbord, Janet (1999) Playing it again: Citation, reiteration or circularity?
         Theory, Culture & Society 16(2): 229–239.           
       Chambers, A Samuel (2007) ‘Sex’ and the problem of the body: Reconstructing Judith Butler’s
         theory of sex/gender. Body & Society 13(4): 47–75.  
       Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1989) Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A Black feminist
         critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. University of
         Chicago Legal Forum 1(8): 131–167.                  
       Derrida, Jacques (1992) Before the law. In: Derek Attridge (ed.) Acts of Literature. New York:
         Routledge, pp. 181–220.                             
       Derrida, Jacques (2000) Limited Inc. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
       Descartes, Rene (1968) Discourse on Method and the Meditations. London: Penguin.
       Fraser, Mariam (1999) Classing queer: Politics in competition. Theory, Culture & Society 16(2):
         107–131.                                            
       Fraser, Nancy (1997) Justice Interruptus: Critical Reflections on the ‘Postsocialist’ Condition.
         London: Routledge.                                  
       Gessen, Masha (2020) Judith Butler wants to reshape our rage, The New Yorker, 9 February.
         Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-new-yorker-interview/judith-butler-
         wants-us-to-reshape-our-rage (accessed 10 June 2023).
       Gleeson, Jules (2021) We need to rethink the category of woman, Guardian, 7 September.
         Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2021/sep/07/judith-butler-interview-
         gender (accessed 7 September 2021).                 
       Hegel, Friedrich Wilhelm Georg (2004) Phenomenology of Spirit. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Hird, J. Myra (2002) Unidentified pleasures: Gender identity and its failure. Body & Society 8(2):
         39–54.                                              

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      306                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      Hughes, Alex and Witz, Anne (1997) Feminism and the matter of bodies: From de Beauvoir to
        Butler. Body & Society 3(1): 47–60.                  
      Kropotkin, Peter (2009) Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution. London: Freedom Books.
      Lloyd, Moya (1999) Performativity, parody, politics. Theory, Culture & Society 16(2): 195–213.
      Loizidou, Elena (2007) Judith Butler: Ethics, Law, Politics. Abingdon: Routledge-Glasshouse.
      Lovell, Terry (2003) Resisting with authority: Historical specificity, agency and the performative
        self. Theory, Culture & Society 20(1): 1–17.         
      Lozano, Hector and Cortés, Eduard (2015–2018) Merlí TV Series: Judith Butler. Spain S2:7.
      McNay, Lois (1999) Subject, psyche and agency: The work of Judith Butler. Theory, Culture &
        Society 16(2): 175–193.                              
      McNay, Lois (2003) Having it both ways: The incompatibility of narrative identity and communi-
        cative ethics in feminist thought. Theory, Culture & Society 20(6): 1–20.
      Meagher, Michelle (2007) Improvisation within a scene of constraint: Cindy Sherman’s serial self-
        portraiture. Body & Society 13(4): 1–19.             
      Nelson, Maggie (2016) The Argonauts. Brooklyn: Melville House.
      Pfingst, Annie and Rosengarten, Marsha (2012) Medicine as a tactic of war: Palestinian precarity.
        Body & Society 18(3–4): 99–125.                      
      Rothenberg, Molly Anne (2006) Embodied political performativity in excitable speech: Butler’s
        psychoanalytic revision of historicism. Theory, Culture & Society 23(4): 71–93.
      Schlichter, Annette (2011) Do voices matter? Vocality, materiality, gender performativity. Body
        & Society 17(1): 31–52.                              
      Schneider, Nathan (2010) A carefully crafted F**k you, Guernica, 15 March. Available at: https://
        www.guernicamag.com/a_carefully_crafted_fk_you/ (accessed 10 April 2010).
      Seeliger, Martin and Braslavsky, Villa Paula-Irene (2022) Reflections on the contemporary public
        sphere: An interview with Judith Butler. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4): 67–74.
      Sennett, Richard (2013) Together: The Rituals, Pleasures and Politics of Cooperation. London:
        Penguin.                                             
      Sloterdijk, Peter (2005) Critique of Cynical Reason. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University
        Press.                                               
      Stirner, Max (2006) Ego and Its Own, ed. David Leopold. Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press.                                               
      Sylvester, Christine (1998) Handmaids’ tales of Washington power: The abject and the real
        Kennedy White House. Body & Society 4(3): 39–66.     
      Taylor, Charles (1999) Hegel. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Vasilaki, Rosa (2016) The politics of postsecular feminism. Theory, Culture & Society 33(2):
        103–123.                                             
      Velicu, Irena and García-López, Gustavo (2018) Thinking the commons through Ostrom and
        Butler: Boundedness and vulnerability. Theory, Culture & Society 35(6): 55–73.
      Yanklowitz, Shmuly (2020) Judaism, coronavirus, and care: Judith Butler interviewed by Shmuly
        Yanklowitz, 7 April. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PsNU7RgQwlY
        (accessed 17 April 2020).                            
      Elena Loizidou is Professor of Law and Political Theory at the School of Law, Birkbeck College.
      Her research focuses in the intersections of law, political theory, gender and critical theory. She is
      the author of Judith Butler: Ethics, Law, Politics (2007) and Anarchism: An Art of Living without
      Law (2022). She is the Review Essay Editor of the journal Law and Critique and an elected mem-
      ber of the organizing committee of the Association for the Study of Law and the Humanities.

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou                                      307     
                                                             
       Tables of Contents                                    
       Articles by Judith Butler                             
       Revisiting Bodies and Pleasures                       
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 11–20   
       Bracha’s Eurydice                                     
       Theory, Culture & Society, February 2004, 21(1): 95–100
       Interviews with Judith Butler                         
       Vikki Bell                                            
       On Speech, Race and Melancholia: An Interview with Judith Butler
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 163–174 
       Vikki Bell                                            
       New Scenes of Vulnerability, Agency and Plurality     
       Theory, Culture & Society, January 2010, 27(1): 130–152
       Martin Seeliger and Paula-Irene Villa Braslavsky      
       Reflections on the Contemporary Public Sphere: An Interview with Judith Butler
       Theory, Culture & Society, July 2022, 39(4): 67–74    
       Book Review                                           
       Vikki Bell                                            
       Judith Butler and Gayatri Spivak, Who Sings the Nation-State?
       Theory, Culture & Society, September 2009, 26(5): 151–156
                                                             
       Articles about Judith Butler                          
       Alex Hughes and Anne Witz                             
       Feminism and the Matter of Bodies: From de Beauvoir to Butler
       Body & Society, March 1997, 3(1): 47–60               
       Christine Sylvester                                   
       Handmaids’ Tales of Washington Power: The Abject and the Real Kennedy White House
       Body & Society, September 1998, 4(3): 39–66.          
       Mariam Fraser                                         
       Classing Queer: Politics in Competition               
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 107–131 
       Vikki Bell                                            
       Mimesis as Cultural Survival: Judith Butler and Anti-Semitism
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 133–161 
       Lois McNay                                            
       Subject, Psyche and Agency: The Work of Judith Butler 
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 175–193 
       Moya Lloyd                                            
       Performativity, Parody, Politics                      
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 195–213 
       Jan Campbell and Janet Harbord                        
       Playing it Again: Citation, Reiteration or Circularity?
       Theory, Culture & Society, April 1999, 16(2): 229–239 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      308                            Theory, Culture & Society 41(7-8)
                                                             
      Roy Boyne                                              
      Citation and Subjectivity: Towards a Return of the Embodied Will
      Body & Society, June 1999, 5(2–3): 209–225             
      Myra J. Hird                                           
      Unidentified Pleasures: Gender Identity and its Failure
      Body & Society, June 2002, 8(2): 39–54                 
      Terry Lovell                                           
      Resisting with Authority: Historical Specificity, Agency and the Performative Self
      Theory, Culture & Society, February 2003, 20(1): 1–17. 
      Lois McNay                                             
      Having it Both Ways: The Incompatibility of Narrative Identity and Communicative
      Ethics in Feminist Thought                             
      Theory, Culture & Society, December 2003, 20(6): 1–20  
      Vikki Bell                                             
      Performative Knowledge                                 
      Theory, Culture & Society, May 2006, 23(2–3): 214–217  
      Molly Anne Rothenberg                                  
      Embodied Political Performativity in Excitable Speech: Butler’s Psychoanalytic Revision
      of Historicism                                         
      Theory, Culture & Society, July 2006, 23(4): 71–93     
      Michelle Meagher                                       
      Improvisation within a Scene of Constraint: Cindy Sherman’s Serial Self-Portraiture
      Body & Society, December 2007, 13(4): 1–19             
      Samuel A. Chambers                                     
      ‘Sex’ and the Problem of the Body: Reconstructing Judith Butler’s Theory of Sex/Gender
      Body & Society, December 2007, 13(4): 47–75            
      Annette Schlichter                                     
      Do Voices Matter? Vocality, Materiality, Gender Performativity
      Body & Society, March 2011, 17(1): 31–52               
      Vikki Bell                                             
      Declining Performativity: Butler, Whitehead and Ecologies of Concern
      Theory, Culture & Society, March 2012, 29(2): 107–123  
      Annie Pfingst and Marsha Rosengarten                   
      Medicine as a Tactic of War: Palestinian Precarity     
      Body & Society, September and December 2012, 18(3–4): 99–125.
      Rosa Vasilaki                                          
      The Politics of Postsecular Feminism                   
      Theory, Culture & Society, March 2016, 33(2): 103–123. 
      Irina Velicu and Gustavo García-López                  
      Thinking the Commons through Ostrom and Butler: Boundedness and Vulnerability
      Theory, Culture & Society, February 2018, 35(6): 55–73 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             