[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        SpecialIssue:ThinkingwithAlgorithms:CognitionandComputationintheWorkofN.KatherineHayles
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2019,Vol.36(2)17–37
        Algorithmic                                          
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2019
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
        Personalization   as  a                              
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276418818888
        Mode   of Individuation            journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Celia Lury                                           
        Warwick University                                   
        Sophie Day                                           
        Goldsmiths, Universityof London                      
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        Recognizing that manyof the modern categories with which we think about people
        and their activities were put in place through the use of numbers, we ask how
        numbering practices compose contemporary sociality. Focusing on particular
        formsofalgorithmicpersonalization,wedescribeapathwayofa-typicalindividuation
        in which repeated and recursive tracking is used to create partial orders in which
        individualsarealwaysmoreandlessthanone.Algorithmicpersonalizationdescribes
        amodeofnumberingthatinvolvesformsofde-andre-aggregating,inwhichavariety
        ofcontextsarecontinuallyincludedandexcluded.Thispathwayofa-typicalindividu-
        ation is important, we suggest, to a variety of domains and, more broadly, to an
        understandingofcontemporaryeconomiesofsharingwherethepoliticsofcollectiv-
        ities, ownership and use are being reconfigured as a default social.
        Keywords                                             
        algorithm, individuation, numbering, optimization, pathway, personalization
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         The less the determinism, the more the possibilities for constraint.
         (Hacking, 1991: 194)                                
                                                             
        This is the age of personalization. Personalizing practices permeate
        everyday life in the UK – we are invited to participate in personalized
        medical, health and care services, to benefit from personalized customer
        experiences, to find our way with personalized maps, acquire a persona-
        lized education, keep up-to-date with personalized news, get a bargain
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:CeliaLury.Email:c.lury@warwick.ac.uk
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      with personalized prices and so on.1 To give some more concrete exam-
      ples: in 2007 the UK government published Putting People First: A
      Shared Vision and Commitment to Finding New Ways to Improve Social
      Care in England.2 The pamphlet outlined the government’s intention to
      transform adult social care so ‘that every person who receives support,
      whetherprovidedbystatutoryservicesorfundedbythemselves,willhave
      choice and control over the shape of that support in all care settings’.
      This ‘vision’ describes itself as a totally different approach to an historic
      ‘onesizefitsall’system.Withaninitialfocusontransformingsocialcare
      and support services, the pamphlet proposes that principles of personal-
      ization be embedded in a range of other service areas such as health and
      education. An example from the field of health and well-being is
      PatientsLikeMe,3 a website that combines features of traditional quali-
      tative online patient communities with quantitative data-collection; the
      (trade-marked) strap-line is ‘Live better, together!’ This website has
      300,000members,who‘share’over23,000diseases,andhavecontributed
      over25milliondatapointsabouttheirdiseases,resultinginover50pub-
      lished research studies. The website says:             
        By sharing health data on PatientsLikeMe, people not only help
        themselves, but help others who can learn from their experiences,
        and advance research.... Learn from others, connect with people
        like you, track your health.                         
      Theplatformisalsodescribedasatoolthathelpspatientsfinda‘just-in-
      time’,‘someone-like-me’peerwhocanbereliedupontocompareoptions
      and aid decision-making. A final example of personalization is the rec-
      ommendation service Stitch Fix,4 a website that describes itself as ‘Your
      partnerinstyle’andwhichseekstorecommend clothingforwomenona
      personal basis. The business proposition is that the recommendation
      service – a composite of algorithmic and human reasoning – knows
      better than the customer herself what clothes she will like: selected
      items of clothing are sent directly to her, without a preview, as otherwise
      her prejudices might prevent her from choosing items that she, unknow-
      ingly, will really like.                               
        Thequestionthisarticleseekstoaddressis:whatkindofindividuation
      (Foucault, 2001; Simondon, 1992) is personalization? We ask this ques-
      tion in order to explore the implications of personalization for how we
      livetogether,thatis,forformsofsociality.Westartfromtheassumption
      that personalization is not only personal: it is never about only one
      person, just me or just you, but always involves generalization. Indeed,
      our argument will be that it is a mode of individuation in which entities
      are precisely specified by way of recursive inclusion in types or classes as
      partofthemakingofwhatwedescribeasana-typicalpathway.Tomake
      this argument, we explore the use of recommendation algorithms to sort
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 19      
                                                             
        or classify people, analysing the way in which individuals are addressed
        as ‘a you’, while their membership of types or classes of person is per-
        petually revised. Our conclusion is that the familiar recognition that
        personalizationseemstoprovide–knowingyoubetterthanyouyourself
        do – should not be considered as merely a more precise form of indi-
        viduation.Tothecontrary,personalizationalsoconstrainswhoandhow
        we can be.                                           
         Recognizing that many of the modern categories with which we think
        about people and their activities were put in place through the use of
        numbers (Hacking, 1991), we develop our analysis of algorithmic per-
        sonalization by drawing on an understanding of number as composition
        (Day et al., 2014). This approach starts from the assumption that num-
        bering is everywhere (Hayles, 2014), even though numbers may not
        always be visible. As such, it seeks to situate contemporary analyses of
        algorithmswithinthewidercontextofculturesofnumbering.AsBadiou
        (2008) remarks, ‘A ‘‘cultural fact’’ is a numerical fact. And, conversely,
        whatever produces number can be culturally located; that which has
        no number shall have no name either’ (Badiou, 2008: 2–3). In a similar
        vein, Totaro and Ninno (2014) also comment on the pervasiveness of
        numbering, but focus specifically on the performativity of the recursive
        function, which, they argue, provides ‘an interpretive key to modern
        rationality’:                                        
         Thenotionthatthe‘logicofnumbers’operatesexclusively onnum-
         bers is misleading. In the second half of the last century, the theory
         of recursive functions has made it clear that the concept of calcu-
         lation is very general and does not necessarily imply the manipula-
         tion of numerical symbols. (2014: 2; see also Neyland, 2014; Totaro
         and Ninno, 2016)                                    
        Morecircumspectly,Heintznotesthat‘theobservationandregulationof
        performances today has become mutual and reflexive, generalised and
        anonymous, and it is now increasingly based on observations and com-
        parisons in terms of numbers’ (Heintz and Vollmer, 2011: 22).
         Our compositional approach acknowledges the pervasiveness of num-
        bering in contemporary society by looking at what numbering does,
        rather than what numbering is. Adopting a felicitous analogy from
        Verran, we think of numbers in the same way as anthropologists do
        kin: numbers both are and have relations, just as people are and have
        relations (Verran, 2010: 171; see also Mackenzie, 2014; Urton, 1997). In
        other words, we propose that it is as working relations that numbers are
        abletoperform:totravel, tomakepossiblecomparison, conversion,and
        exchange, to be stored, to inform, and to make the same or different. By
        looking at how numbers are composed or formed in relations, and how
        social and cultural practices are formed (in part) by number, we aim to
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      showhownumbering isare-presentation –in thiscase,of persons –that
      always holds more than one presentation.               
        To understand how it is that we have become habituated to declaring,
      measuringandsharingourpersonalcharacteristics,behavioursandopin-
      ions in the UK in order to carry out mundane activities, we begin by
      situating our analysis in the context of what has been called a ‘like econ-
      omy’(GerlitzandHelmond,2013).Thiscontextisimportant,wesuggest,
      insofar as it makes relational value available for computational calcula-
      tion. Drawing on our compositional approach to numbering, we then
      develop a set of terms – tracking, bordering, folding and pausing – that
      lead us to describe forms of personalization that are performed by rec-
      ommendation algorithms as the making of a pathway of a-typical indi-
      viduation. Critically, this pathway creates ‘a’ person or individual that is
      always provisional and corresponds only partially with the type or cat-
      egory in which it is included, whether this concerns what a person might
      buy,like,shareorpossess.Theterm‘pathway’isintendedtocapturethis
      category of person, a category that is never static but always changing
      and always in motion. While our analytic focus is on the example of
      algorithmic personalization, and in particular algorithmic personaliza-
      tionthatinvolves theuseofcollaborative filters,wealso makereferences
      to other examples which share the same logic.          
      Liking and Likeness                                    
                                                             
      Theriseofa‘likeeconomy’begins,soGerlitzandHelmond(2013)argue,
      with the arrival of Google in the late 1990s. It is widely known that
      Google’s early success stemmed from its use of a search engine that
      shifted the value determination of websites from hits alone to hits and
      links. The hyperlink analysis algorithm, PageRank, enabled calculation
      of the relative importance and ranking of a page within a larger set of
      pages, based on the number of in-links to the page and, recursively, the
      value of the pages linking to that page and so on. All links do not have
      equal value in this type of search engine, as links from authoritative
      sources or links from sources receiving many in-links are weighted in
      the algorithm.                                         
        The use of weighted measures of linking was a first step towards
      inscribing the capacity to identify and intensify ‘relational value’ in
      search engine algorithms (Gerlitz and Helmond, 2013; see also Feuz
      et al., 2011). And it is this relational value, we propose, that is central
      to personalization insofar as it makes relations between people available
      for computational calculation. Since this first step, the capacity to make
      relations of linking – or sharing – has been significantly extended as the
      determination of ‘authority’ has changed in line with the participatory
      features of Web 2.0. More web users now participate in making
      connections between websites through the creation and exchange of
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 21      
                                                             
        user-generated content (as well as gaming and the purchase of position).
        In particular, social buttons allow users to share, recommend, like or
        bookmark content, posts and pages across various social media plat-
        forms. In 2006, Facebook launched a share icon as a way for someone
        to share web content and invite re-sharing and then, in 2009, it intro-
        duced the Like button. In 2010, the company extended the capacities of
        the Like button to link by introducing an external Like button, a plugin
        that could be implemented by any webmaster, potentially rendering all
        web content like-able. Significantly, the external ‘Like’ button not only
        captures actual likes, but also aggregates all activities performed on a
        web object: the number of likes and shares, further likes and comments
        on stories, and the number of inbox messages containing the object as
        an attachment. In another important development, Facebook’s Open
        Graph Protocol opened up their social graph – a representation of
        people and their connections – for external content, allowing for a con-
        trolled way of exchanging preformatted data between Facebook and the
        external web.                                        
         It is through the use of these and other techniques, so Gerlitz and
        Helmond argue, that Facebook has been able to build a ‘like economy’,
        thatis,aneconomythatbuildsonandexploitsrelationalvalue,mediated
        by participation. They further suggest that this economy produces what,
        using Mark Zuckerberg’s own phrase, they call ‘the default social’. To
        this analysis we want to add the observation that the relations between
        the individual and the population that characterize this new social are
        both participatory and participative in that users may participate know-
        ingly (participatory) or unknowingly (participative). Moreover, partici-
        pation in the default social is mediated by techniques of exclusive
        inclusion and inclusive exclusion (Agamben, 1998).5 On the one hand,
        the Open Graph is able to include non-users of Facebook as the external
        Like button cookie can trace non-users and add any information gained
        as anonymous data to the Facebook database and, on the other hand, a
        user’sexplicitlyinvitedactivitiesmaybeexcludedorrenderedinvisibleto
        otherusersiftheyarenotsufficientlyhighlyrankedinthedimensionsthe
        graph provides. These oscillating dynamics – of being excluded in ways
        thatinformtheorderingofthoseincluded,andbeingincludedbutnotin
        ways that allow you to understand the terms of your membership – were
        intensified further in 2011 when Facebook expanded the possibilities of
        ‘invisible’ participation by proliferating custom actions:
         Whencreatinganapp,developersarepromptedtodefineverbsthat
         are shown as user actions and to specify the object on which these
         actions can be performed. Instead of being confined to ‘like’ exter-
         nal web content, users can now ‘read’, ‘watch’, ‘discuss’ or perform
         other actions. (Gerlitz and Helmond, 2013: 1353)    
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      GerlitzandHelmondconcludetheiranalysisoftheemergenceofthelike
      economy by suggesting that Facebook is being developed as an ‘infra-
      structure of decentralised data production and recentralised data pro-
      cessing’ (2013: 1357). While they do not discuss the role of
      recommendation systems within this infrastructure, these have become
      increasingly important operators of the de- and re-centralizing practices
      of the economy Gerlitz and Helmond describe. Structured by the
      ‘participatory’ practices of inclusive exclusion and exclusive inclusion,
      recommendation algorithms penetrate all corners of the internet,
      makingpersonalizedrecommendations–directlyandindirectly–toindi-
      vidualswithinterestsinavarietyoffields,includingmovies,music,news,
      books, research publications, restaurants, jokes, financial services, prod-
      ucts of all sorts and persons (for example, in online dating). It is to these
      algorithms that we now turn.                           
                                                             
      Recommendation Algorithms                              
      While very many different kinds of algorithms are used in recommenda-
      tion systems, two main kinds are distinguished: collaborative filtering
      algorithms and content sharing algorithms. Sometimes, as in Netflix,
      they are combined. The former group of algorithms is based on large
      amountsof digital dataonusers’ behaviour,activities orpreferences and
      leads to predictions of what users will like based on their similarity to
      others (see further below). An example is Last.fm,6 a music ‘station’ or
      streaming service that personalizes the music it transmits by observing
      the music an individual has listened to on a regular basis and comparing
      those tracks with the listening behaviour of other individuals. The cal-
      culative process involved in this group of algorithms is sometimes
      described as ‘leveraging’ the behaviour of users7 since it requires the
      participation of many users to produce personalized recommendations
      for one person.8 Content-based filtering methods, in contrast, are based
      on a description of an item in terms of discrete characteristics; the algo-
      rithm is then designed to produce recommendations for individual users
      of items that have similar properties to those that the individual liked in
      the past (or is examining in the present). Pandora Internet Radio
      (currently restricted to listeners in the USA, Australia and New
      Zealand because of licensing restrictions) is an example: it makes use
      of an algorithm that uses properties of a song or artists (a subset of
      the 450 attributes provided by the Music Genome Project) in order to
      seed a station to transmit personalized music (Prey, 2017).
        We focus on collaborative filtering algorithms, partly because their
      ability to make successful predictions across fields is held to be stronger
      than that of content-based algorithms, but also because they require and
      exploit ‘participatory’ methods to develop novel classificatory tech-
      niques. As such, they allow us to identify distinctive aspects of
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 23      
                                                             
        personalization as a mode of individuation. Crucially for the use of such
        algorithms, information relating to ‘pre-existing’ or demographic quali-
        ties of the person or entity concerned is not required to produce perso-
        nalized recommendations. Instead the information required is produced
        through the aggregation of the ongoing participation of both the indi-
        vidualto whomtherecommendations aremade and other usersof social
        media. Rather than allocating users to a pre-existing class, group or type
        (typically a socio-demographic stratum), the properties of which are pre-
        sumed to be known in advance, the operations of collaborative filtering
        start from the premise that (individual) customers who share (that is,
        have in common) some preferences will also share others. This single
        but powerful assumption is of value for those developing algorithms in
        that ‘the only information [they need] to work is a set of numerical
        ratings – specific information about users or items to be recommended
        is not necessary’ (Seaver, 2012).                    
         It is worth exploring how these numerical ratings are turned into
        personalized recommendations in some detail. A helpful analysis is pro-
        vided by Seaver (2012), who describes the ‘signature action’ of collab-
        orativefilteringalgorithmsintermsoftheoperationofagrid,withitems
        along one side, users along the other, and numerical ratings at their
        intersections (see also Bowker, 2014; http://personalisedcommunica-
        tion.net/the-project/). Significantly, this grid is a matrix, that is, a
        grid with the formatted capacity to map (or perform) network
        transformations:                                     
         This matrix is mostly empty (or ‘sparse’), since most users will have
         not rated most items. The work of the collaborative filtering algo-
         rithm ... is to predict what values will show up in the empty spaces
         of the matrix. These predictions are then provided in some form to
         the user as recommendations. (Seaver, 2012)         
        Seaver continues:                                    
                                                             
         At any given time, the matrix is in an anticipatory flux: new ratings
         from users arrive constantly, displacing their predicted values and
         shifting the others. The calculative operations involved in this in-
         filling process is the signature action within the matrix – blank
         values are replaced by predictions, which are then replaced by
         actual ratings.9                                    
        In the next stage described by Seaver, the numbers from the matrix are
        statisticallyanalysedandtheirvarianceismappedtoanumberofdimen-
        sions or axes. Users who are ‘near’ each other on this multi-dimensional
        coordinate system are held to be similar (like each other), and a user will
        be recommended items from the neighbourhood around them. It is this
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      24                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      calculative activity that leads to the paradigmatic claim of such algo-
      rithms to specify the individual in the complex conjugated personalized
      address: ‘People like you like things like this.’      
        But how, if at all, does this description of the calculative logic in rec-
      ommendation algorithms help us understand what is distinctive about
      personalization as a mode of individuation? Seaver concludes that pref-
      erenceandsimilarityarecollapsedinthiscalculativesystemsince‘liking’
      and ‘being like’ are equated. We consider that an understanding of the
      compositionoftheserelationswillhelpusseehownumbersarerendered
      consequential for the making up of persons (Hacking, 1991). How is this
      equation accomplished or, in our terms, composed? If we are to address
      the specificity of personalization as a mode of individuation we need to
      see the particular ways in which numbers both are and have relations.
                                                             
      Pathways of A-typical Individuation                    
      Seaver’s claim about the equivalence between liking and likeness in
      recommendation algorithms is less critical to our argument than his
      observation that this calculative matrix is in a constant state of anticipa-
      tory flux. Indeed, we propose that the emphasis on perpetual renewal
      means that the equation of ‘liking’ and ‘being like’ that is accomplished
      by these recommendation algorithms is not about establishing relations
      of absolute equivalence. Instead, we suggest, the calculative activity that
      producestheanticipatoryfluxofthematrixinvolvesanongoingseriesof
      approximations in which ‘being like’ and ‘liking’ are continually made
      more and less like each other in a variety of ways. Such approximations,
      we would emphasize, are designed to be subject to constant testing.
        As Seaver points out, such approximations vary hugely depending on
      the calculative space in which they are produced (3 or 9 axes or dimen-
      sions, for example). Their value – that is, their ability to produce perso-
      nalized recommendations in terms of criteria of accuracy, diversity
      (of recommendations), privacy protection and trust – is realized as
      theyaretestedrepeatedlyinrelationtodatacollectedviaawholevariety
      of participatory methods and metrics as part of what have been called
      experiments in participation (Lezaun et al., 2016). In other words, the
      personalized address to ‘a you’ is not achieved through the collapse of
      liking and likeness, preference and similarity, but through a carefully
      calibrated sequencing of their possible inter-relationship. Crucially, this
      process not only involves the statistical making of proximity or nearness
      butalsotheturning ofnear-nessintonext-ness, aprocessofbordering or
      adjoining. We conclude therefore that personalization is not the collapse
      of liking and likeness but the making of a pathway, a dynamic series of
      approximations of similarity and preference that makes persons.
        Indeed,thispathwaycanbedescribedasamodeofa-typicalindividu-
      ation. What do we mean, though, in our use of a-typical? Certainly it
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 25      
                                                             
        might seem counter-intuitive to use the term at all if it is understood to
        mean ‘not typical’ or ‘not of a type’, since we have argued throughout
        that personalization is a mode of individuation that involves generaliza-
        tionthroughthe(repeatedorrecursive)inclusionofanentityinatypeor
        class. The term ‘a-typical’ is thus used to describe a mode of recursive
        inclusion, in which both the individual and the type are repeatedly
        specified anew. In doing so, it draws on multiple – etymologically
        unrelated – meanings of ‘a’.                         
         The first set of meanings is associated with the use of ‘a’ as the indef-
        initearticle,sincethisusedirectlyindicatesmembershipinatypeorclass
        of people, things or events (‘this is a cat’, ‘this is a friend of mine’). The
        indefiniteness of this inclusion, while appearing to indicate a lack of
        determination, has its own logic: for example, as well as meaning ‘one
        single’or‘any’,‘a’isalsocommonlyusedtointroducesomeoneorsome-
        thing for the first time. It allows for a mode of inclusion in a type or
        categoryonthebasisof criteriathatarenotpre-givenbutrather opento
        further (indefinite) specification (‘If that is what you think, then you are
        not a friend of mine because a friend of mine would not think that’). As
        the indefinite article, ‘a’ is also used to specify both someone or some-
        thing as being like someone or something else (‘you are a star’) and to
        express rates or ratios, as in ‘for each’ or ‘per’. These meanings of the ‘a’
        in the term ‘a-typical’ thus call up the operation of the two analytically
        distinct, but historically intertwined, understandings of analogy identi-
        fied by Stafford (2001): participation (similitude, mimesis, likeness) and
        proportion (ratio).10 Inour use, they are combined to produce principles
        of inclusion that are subject – recursively – to further revision: their
        combination is the means by which the you that is ‘a you’ becomes a
        recursive shifter (Chun, 2011, 2016).                
         To these meanings of ‘a’ as the indefinite article, however, we
        add a further meaning, that is, ‘a’ as a variant spelling of ‘ad-’, denoting
        motion or direction, a reduction or change into, an addition, increase
        or intensification, as in ‘adjoin’ or ‘adjacent’. The etymology of these
        terms relates to the Latin adjacentem, adjacens; from adjacere, ‘to
        lie at, to border upon, to lie near’; from ad-, ‘to’ + jacere, ‘to lie, to
        rest’; literally, ‘to throw’. Our use of the term a-typical to describe
        pathways of individuation is thus intended to describe the ways in
        which collaborative filtering algorithms are designed to allow for the
        ongoing redefinition of principles of inclusion and exclusion via the
        recursive activity of adjoining or the work of adjacency: what we
        describe as the compositional practice of bordering or framing.11 In
        this practice, the aim is to create, not equivalence, but a topological
        invariance: that is, the aim is to achieve a continuity of a recursive func-
        tion12 such that likeness (‘People like you’) is iteratively produced as
        a pathway through a massively aggregated de- and re-contexting of
        liking.                                              

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      26                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
        Howthisisaccomplishedinthemulti-dimensionalcalculativespaceof
      recommendation algorithms can be illustrated by way of a consideration
      of ‘the next adjacentpossible’, aterm developed bythe theoretical biolo-
      gist Stuart Kauffman (2000).13 Put briefly, Kauffman understands life in
      terms of autonomous agents,14 by which he means ‘something that can
      act on its own behalf in an environment’. This living entity is ‘something
      that can both reproduce itself and do at least one thermodynamic work
      cycle’ (Kauffman, 2000: 64). He says:                  
        That bacterium, sculling up the glucose gradient, flagellum flailing
        in work cycles, is busy as hell doing ‘it’, reproducing and carrying
        out one or more work cycles. So too are all free-living cells and
        organisms. We do, in blunt fact, link spontaneous and nonsponta-
        neous processes in richly webbed pathways of interaction that
        achieve reproduction and the persistent work cycles by which we
        act on the world. Beavers do build dams; yet beavers are ‘just’
        physical systems. (Kauffman, 2000: 64)               
                                                             
      In making this argument, Kauffman emphasizes the importance of the
      role of adjoining or bordering and points to the constitutive role of the
      particular material constraints (or context) in which any entity individu-
      ates.Healsoidentifiestheworkofadjacencyastheactivityof‘construct-
      ing constraints that can manipulate constraints’, thus drawing attention
      totheroleoftheborderastheoperatoroftherelationoftheinsideofan
      entity to its outside.                                 
        Drawing on this analysis, we return to our observation on testing.
      Personalized recommendations are based on the making of nearness or
      adjacency in a multi-dimensional space, but the implementation of col-
      laborative filtering algorithms requires that they be subject to repeated
      testing in the specific kinds of relations to context that are commonly
      called participation. The aim of this testing is to identify constraints that
      can manipulate constraints; for example, in A/B tests or tests of ‘liking’,
      to identify a changed ordering of likes so that some future preference
      becomes more likely – or predictable. It is only insofar as a population’s
      relations to multiple contexts (including data relating to liking, sensing
      and sharing as well as to time and space) are registered by the algorithm
      that the mode of individuation we are describing can happen at all. In
      other words, the (numerical-cultural) process of folding a whole into,
      across or within itself to make parts, of de- and re-contexting what
      Zuckerburg describes as the default social, is fundamental to the
      making of pathways of a-typical individuation. As Seaver (2015)
      observes, while it is sometimes claimed that big data has no context,
      ‘context is everything’ for recommendation algorithms.15
        Ithasbeenwidelyobservedthatalgorithmsdonotoperateinisolation
      fromcontext-awaretechniquesofdatacaptureandcollection astheyare
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 27      
                                                             
        organized in particular calculative infrastructures (Hayles, 2002; Verran,
        2011). Dourish, for example, notes:                  
                                                             
         If the database is malleable, extensible, or revisable, it is so not
         simply because it is represented as electrical signals in a computer
         or magnetic traces on a disk; malleability, extensibility, and revisa-
         bility depend too on the maintenance of constraints that make this
         specific collection of electrical signals or magnetic traces work as a
         database; and within these constraints, new materialities need to be
         acknowledged. (Dourish, 2014)                       
                                                             
        Similarly, Amoore and Piotukh highlight the changing role of indexing
        practices in data-collection activities:             
         while structured data is territorially indexable, in the sense that it
         can be queried on the horizontal and vertical axes of spreadsheets
         within databases, so-called unstructured data demands new forms
         ofindexingthatallowforanalysistobedeterritorialized(conducted
         across jurisdictions, or via distributed or cloud computing, for
         example) and to be conducted across diverse data forms – images,
         video, text in chat rooms, audio files and so on. (Amoore and
         Piotukh, 2015: 345)                                 
                                                             
        Astheyalsoobserve,theactivityof‘(ad-)joining’isofparticularimport-
        ance in the deployment of these new forms of indexing. They give the
        example of IBM’s predictive policing:                
                                                             
         The linking of the data elements is performed through joins across
         data from different data sets, either on the basis of direct intersec-
         tions with already indexed data (e.g. via a phone, credit card or
         social security number ingested from a database), or probabilistic-
         ally, through correlations among data-points from different sources
         (e.g. text scraped from a Twitter account correlated with facial
         biometrically tagged images drawn from Facebook). (Amoore and
         Piotukh, 2015: 345)                                 
        It is not just that there is more than one relevant context for recommen-
        dation algorithms. Different contexts are deliberately made to appear or
        disappear in different practices of context-ing. Indeed, this emphasis on
        context – what is sometimes called context-awareness – provides another
        compelling reason to describe personalization as a pathway of a-typical
        individuation. A trajectory is not established in advance – as when we
        travelwiththeaimofmovingfromAtoB,alreadyknowingwhereBis–
        but in response to contexts that emerge in the making of a path.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      28                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      Becoming Normal by Being Better than You               
                                                             
      We turn now to a discussion of the consequences of personalization for
      the making of the default social, by considering the practice of normal-
      ization (Agamben, 1998; Canguilhem, 1991; Foucault, 1991; Hacking,
      1991).16 In his discussion of modes of governance linked to earlier
      forms of statistical normalization, Hacking (1991) argues that debates
      concerning the setting of boundary conditions were fundamental to the
      way in which a population was governed by statistical laws. Updating
      this argument, we suggest that the work of adjoining in the personaliza-
      tion practices described above involves an ongoing reorganization of
      boundary conditions (operating the relation between inside and outside,
      inclusion and exclusion through techniques of contexting) that trans-
      forms conditions of governmentality. This is especially clear in relation
      to the way in which practices of normalization now require the achieve-
      ment of transitivity.17 On the one hand, the verbs of the vocabulary of
      participation – liking, sharing, linking – describe activities in which
      objectsarerepeatedlyattachedto persons; thatis, theypromote analgo-
      rithmickindoflinguistictransitivity(asin‘thingslikethislikepeoplelike
      you’). On the other hand, the data collected through the tracking of
      participation are then ordered transitively – in a mathematical sense –
      inann-dimensionalspaceoflikenessorsimilitude.Inthesepractices,the
      ‘new normal’ of individuation appears as a function of the ideal of
      transitive closure, an internal limit, in relation to which every possible
      relation (between verb and object) is partially ordered in such a way that
      the you that is ‘a you’ is similar to other ‘yous’, that is, nearly but not
      quitethesameas other‘yous’, andneverquiteableto beconsolidatedas
      an ‘us’.                                               
        While this limit can never be reached since it involves a never-ending
      in-filling in relation to a constantly changing population,18 we are none-
      theless witnessing a proliferation of models of optimization across the
      fields of medicine, marketing, project management and operational
      research (the last of which is sometimes described as ‘the science of
      better’, the significance of which will be made apparent below). In such
      models,optimalpathwaysofa-typicalindividuationarecommonlyiden-
      tified in ‘experiments in participation’ in relation to specific objectives,
      often through software that merges data with parameters (as in the case
      of the parametric algorithms discussed by Parisi, 2013) or employs evo-
      lutionarymodelling.Asdescribedabove,oneofthenovelaspectsofsuch
      techniquesisthecalculativedeploymentofrecursionsuchthattheaimof
      theactionofad-joiningisnotsetinrelationtoapredefinedtarget;rather
      pathway and target emerge together.                    
        Indeed, the term ‘precision medicine’ is sometimes preferred to the
      synonyms personalized or stratified medicine because it acknowledges
      the significance of the necessarily dynamic fit between, for example,

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 29      
                                                             
        a cancer, drug target, resistance and side effects through repeated moni-
        toring and the operationalization of the feedback loop between evalu-
        ation and intervention.19 In some cases, the methods of operational
        research are applied in conjunction with computational biology with
        the aim of identifying a pathway that has a ‘biologically meaningful
        objective’: a network is ‘designed (or revised) optimally’ to find ‘the nat-
        ural circumstances that trigger one particular pathway but not others’.20
        An example of findings based upon pathways defined in molecular terms
        ratherthanbyanatomyortraditionaldiseaseclassificationistherecently
        reported study (Mateo et al., 2015) of the efficacy of the drug Olaparib,
        approved for treating ovarian cancers with BRCA1/2 mutations. This
        study built upon the finding that cancers are significantly heterogeneous
        at the molecular level and discovered that the variation within one, such
        as ovarian cancer, can be more marked than between cancers, such as
        ovarian and prostate, when tracked in terms of their differential sensitiv-
        ity to particular treatments.                        
         More broadly, we can see the operation of principles of optimization
        modelling in the now ubiquitous ordinal tropes of ranking, which ensure
        that what counts as best is not given in advance, but rather emerges in a
        participative fashion with the (continually changing) requirement to do
        and be better (Esposito, 2013; Gerlitz and Lury, 2014; Guyer, 2010). In
        these practices the you that is addressed is both specific and a you ‘that is
        likeeveryoneelse’(Chun,2011),onlymoreorlessso.Theexhortationto
        ‘Believe in Better’21 pervades contemporary culture and might be seen as
        an appropriation of ‘optimism of the will’, recursively calibrating rela-
        tions between individuals and populations to establish new forms of
        stratification (Fourcade and Healey, 2013; Ruppert, 2011). In the
        requirement to be like but better than each other established in relation
        tosuchoptimizingpractices,youandIarenotjustdifferenttoeachother
        but different-er: our differences are such that we are always both more
        and less different to each other. As the Optimizely commercial platform
        informs us, ‘Being personal is no longer optional’,22 or, as the name of a
        British financial services comparison website says, GoCompare.23
        Indeed, it is not just persons thatare invited – or obliged – to participate
        in bettering themselves in the compositional practices of personalization:
        universities, hospitals, museums, police forces, hotels, holidays, restaur-
        ants, brands and schools are also now frequently placed in dynamic
        relations of competitive comparison with eachother by often mandatory
        or non-voluntary inclusion in the recursive partial orderings of ranking
        systems. While normalization techniques sometimes provide a statistical
        snapshot, a one-off cross-section of a population fixed in relation to a
        single environment (the nation, for example), personalization is note-
        worthy for the way that it establishes (constantly shifting) grounds for
        dynamic stratification in relation to multiple norms in multiple
        environments.                                        

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      30                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      Signature Pathways                                     
                                                             
      We consider one further aspect of the making of a pathway of a-typical
      individuation by exploring the use of ‘you’ as a shifter. In linguistic
      terms, shifters such as ‘this’ and ‘that’ as well as ‘I’ and ‘you’ can only
      be understood by reference to the context in which they are uttered. In
      other words, a shifter, sometimes also called a place-holder, is an index-
      ical term whose meaning cannot be determined without referring to the
      message that is being communicated. The ‘you’ in a pathway of person-
      alization designates both the person to whom a message is directed and
      the ‘you’ that is contained in the message that is sent. In relation to our
      description of algorithmic personalization, it is the suturing of this dou-
      bling in the shifter that makes a personalized address to the individual
      possible and also organizes the activity of shifting as adjoining, creating
      constraints that can manipulate constraints in the making of a pathway.
        For Jakobson (1971 [1957]), enunciation is encoded in a shifter in the
      statement itself. While Jakobson defines the shifter as an indexical
      symbol, Lacan defines it as an indexical signifier in order to problematize
      the distinction between enunciation and statement. As a signifier, the
      shifter‘I’isnormallypartofastatement.Asanindex,itisalsonormally
      partoftheenunciation.ForLacan(1977),thisdivisionordistributionof
      the ‘I’ or ‘you’ does not merely illustrate the splitting of a subject; it is
      that split. Drawing on these understandings of shifters, it seems that the
      indexical signifier is not stopped or ‘arrested’ by (representatives of) the
      symbolic order (Fenves, 2002) in the anticipatory flux of personalizing
      practices.24 In the context of (algorithmic) personalization, it seems that
      theshifterisratherpaused.Temporaryhaltingincitesparticipationorthe
      folding of a context into the pathway. Indeed, it is this pausing, the
      marking of an interval, a stopping and starting that repetitively gathers
      a collectivity. In assembling observers and observed, pausing allows for
      both observation and the observation of the observing (Kaldrack and
      Ro¨ hle, 2014).                                        
        Given thata pathwayis a process of stoppingand starting thatrepeti-
      tively gathers a collectivity, it is not surprising that the ability to identify
      somepathwaysbutnotothers–thesignatureactionSeaverdescribes–is
      currently the source of considerable interest. Frow’s discussion of signa-
      ture and brand (2002) is illuminating in this respect. He describes the
      signature as a shifter that sets up ‘a tension between representation and
      the represented’ and observes that the signature is not only an index of
      the act of framing (of adjoining or bordering), but also designates a
      naming right. Specifically, Frow argues that the power of the signature
      stemsfromtheelision ofthedifferencebetween thesignatureas anindex
      andthetaxonomicfunctionofthepropername.Thiselisioniseffectedin
      a particular way by the brand, he asserts, since ‘the ‘‘Name’’, when one
      abstractsitfromthesignatureitindicates,losesits‘‘index’’characterand

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 31      
                                                             
        becomes a ‘‘trademark’’. Like the trademark, the name is of a symbolic
        order’ (Gandelman, quoted in Frow, 2002: 63).        
         As Frow observes, the brand’s economic significance as a ‘nexus
        between high-speed, continuous flow manufacturing and the reshaping
        of people’s habits and lives’ (Ohmann, 1996: 61 in Frow, 2002: 64) is
        growing.Thedetachmentfromindexicalityiswhatprovidesthebasisfor
        usingthesignatureasaclaimtoownership.Importantly,however,Frow
        argues that the brand is in principle reducible to neither a product nor a
        corporation. As a quasi-signature or signature-effect, a brand name is
        routinelyattachedtoaproductrange,andeventogenerationsofproduct
        ranges, rather than to singular objects. It is precisely the divisibility of
        brand from product (in practices of bordering or framing) that makes
        possiblethetransferofbrandloyaltyfromonegenerationofaproductto
        another. With Frow’s insights, we propose that recommendation algo-
        rithmscreatepathwaysofa-typicalindividuationthatarealwaysdistinct
        (divisible and detachable) from both object and person. In consequence,
        thewaysinwhichsuchpathwaysacquireautonomyornot,andhowthat
        autonomy is recognized,25 constitute the heart of current debates on the
        sharingeconomy.Itisherethatthepoliticsofcollectivity,ownershipand
        use are being reconfigured.                          
        Conclusion                                           
                                                             
        Wehavearguedthatpersonalizationisamodeofa-typicalindividuation
        that is produced in techniques of recursive divisibility (the drawing of
        lines of inclusive exclusion and exclusive inclusion). As such, it provides
        anentrypointintotheconstitutionofwhat,followingMarkZuckerburg,
        we have called the ‘default social’. Crucially, as a numbering practice,
        personalization doesnotinvolvezooming(Dayet al.,2014),aperforma-
        tivegesturethatoperatesthedynamismofmovingfrombigtosmall,that
        is,aslidefromonetomanyandbackagain,asiftheonlydifferencetobe
        registered was that of an increase in a uniform quantity (as in what
        Badiou calls the count of one). Instead, this is a mode of numbering
        thatconstitutes adefault socialthrough forms ofde- and re-aggregating,
        inwhichavarietyofcontextsareincludedandexcluded,suchthatoneis
        always more and less than one. In a recursive process that involves
        tracking bordering, folding and pausing, the individual is precisely and
        momentarily specified as ‘a you’ (Chun, 2016), that is, as a dividual
        (Raunig, 2015; Strathern, 1998). At the same time, pausing allows for
        the composition of heterogeneous (numerical-cultural) quantities, in
        which qualitative differences of mass are recognized at different levels
        of observation as matters of dimension and scale. Put somewhat differ-
        ently,thepersonwhoisaddressedasayouisrefractedinmultiplepartial
        orderings that allow for specific forms of comparison and competition
        (of better-ing) whilethe folding of contexts into the pathway creates new
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      32                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      ways of configuring relations between participation and proportion,
      sharing, ownership and use in the identification of signature pathways.
        Importantly, our argument does not suggest that personalization is
      replacing other modes of individuation. Rather, it introduces new tech-
      niques that combine in a variety of ways to transform and intensify
      contemporary forms of individualism.26 As such, it merely confirms
      Hacking’s observation in relation to the history of the making up of
      people: ‘The less the determinism, the more the possibilities for con-
      straint’ (1991: 194).                                  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
                                                             
       1. Celia Lury would like to acknowledge the support of Economic and Social
         Research Council (ESRC), ES/K010689/1, and Sophie Day would like to
         acknowledge the support of the National Institute for Health Research
         (NIHR) Imperial BioMedical Research Centre.         
       2. See: https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130104175839/http://
         www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/Publications
         PolicyAndGuidance/DH_081118                         
       3. See: http://www.patientslikeme.com                 
       4. See: https://www.stitchfix.com                     
       5. These are practices that Agamben (1998, 2011) associates with sovereignty:
         bare life, he argues, has always been the object and the aim of state action,
         andithasalwaysbeensubjectedtoelaboratemechanismsofbothinclusion
         and exclusion.                                      
       6. See: http://www.last.fm                            
       7. Arvidsson (2016) argues that it is through personalization that platforms
         suchasFacebookwill–ontheirownandinconjunctionwiththirdparties–
         benefit from the financialization of everyday life. 
       8. Oneofthemostfamousexamplesofthisgroupisitem-to-itemcollaborative
         filtering, an algorithm developed by Amazon.        
       9. Seaver goes on:                                    
            Thecollaborativefilteringmatrixintermeshestheidentitiesofusers
            anditems.Itisbothpossibleandtypicalforacollaborativefilterto
            take no special account of either, organizing all entities strictly in
            terms of ratings: users are known as a [ranked] collection of rela-
            tions to items and items are known as a [ranked] collection of
            relations to users. Persons and things enjoy no separate modes of
            existence in the matrix, which is indeed a function for translating
            one into the other. (Seaver, 2012)               
         Inotherwords,collaborativefilteringalgorithmsdonotjustdeterminethat
         ‘Users like you liked items like this’; they also establish that ‘Items like this
         liked users like you.’ This ‘collaboration’ is very different from that of the
         taste-bearing individuals explored by Bourdieu (1987) in Distinction, where
         therelationsarethoseofclassandtheexerciseoftaste,andinvolvesymbolic

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 33      
                                                             
          violence. How pathways of ‘a-typical individuation’ will coincide with,
          transformorsupersedesuch‘demographic’stratificationremainstobeseen.
        10. For Stafford, analogy is an associative method, a demonstrative and
          evidentiarypractice.Shesays:‘Analogycorrelatesoriginalitywithcontinuity,
          what comes after with what went before.... This transport of predicates
          involvesa mutualsharing in, or partaking of,certain determinable quantita-
          tiveandqualitativeattributesthroughamediatingimage’(Stafford,2001:9).
        11. Bateson describes set theory diagrams as ‘a topological approach to the
          logic of classification’ (Bateson, 1999: 186). In such diagrams a frame is a
          mode of referring by ordering. As Tkacz observes in a commentary on
          Bateson, ‘A frame always sorts things as either belonging or not belonging
          andthisprocessismediatedbyaxiomsorprinciples–indeed,theaxiomsare
          what define the frame; they are the conditions of its possibility’ (Tkacz,
          2014: 71).                                         
        12. Totaro and Ninno (2014) argue that what is fundamental to the recursive
          function is that repetition becomes the aim of action.
        13. Rabinow’s understanding of adjacency provides another, related set of
          terms (Rabinow, 2009). For Rabinow, the concept of adjacency is both
          analytic, in that sets of relations must be decomposed and specified, and
          synthetic,inthattheserelationsmustberecomposedandgivennewform.In
          this process, a neighbourhood emerges as the figure of what moves in
          tandem, together, the outcome of the interlinked processes of analysis and
          synthesis.                                         
        14. Kauffmanobservesinrelationtoautonomousagentsthat:‘Attheendofthe
          cycle the system is poised to cycle again’ (Kauffman, 2000: 68).
        15. The Optimizely (https://www.optimizely.com) platforms says that it can:
          ‘Connect that browsing behavior, demographic information, contextual
          clues,and1st-and3rd-partydataintoacomplete pictureofyourcustomer
          that you can use to power personalized experiences.’
        16. Hacking(1991)arguesthat‘normalcy’isoneofthemostsociallysignificant
          statistical meta-concepts. We are pointing to the significance of normaliza-
          tion without, we hope, imputing any consensus to the very different con-
          cepts and trajectories implicated in this meta-concept across a range of
          disciplines.                                       
        17. Transitivity has a range of meanings in different disciplines. In lin-
          guistics, for example, transitivity is a property of verbs that relates to
          whether a verb can take direct objects and how many such objects a verb
          can take. In mathematics, a binary relation over a set is transitive if, when-
          ever an element a is related to an element b, and b in turn is related to an
          element c, a is also related to c. The partial ordering produced by the algo-
          rithms discussed above organizes liking in relations that are transitive in
          both senses.                                       
        18. Parisi(2013)offersanotherviewofthelimitsofreason,specificallyinrelation
          to computation. She suggests that parametric quantities are discrete entities
          thatnotonlyselectdata,aspartofthesoftwareintowhichtheyarescripted;
          they may also be infected by data that they are not able to compute:
              Instead of being a continuous flow of data, such as a topological
              binding of many actualities into one stream of ceaseless variation,

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      34                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
            the incomputable ... is an infinite series of discrete yet incomplete
            data that immanently ingresses and becomes uniquely arranged
            into algorithmic sets, in which these data acquire togetherness
            and continuity. (Parisi, 2013: 170)              
      19. Inprecisionmedicine(oritssynonyms),referenceiscommonlymadetothe
         4Ps, which are predictive, personalized, preventive and participatory.
         Some of the advocates of this approach describe current developments as
         a revolution:                                       
            fueled by several factors: first, an appreciation that medicine is an
            information science; second, systems or holistic approaches to
            studying the enormous complexities of disease; third, emerging
            technologies that will let us explore new dimensions of patient
            data space; and fourth, powerful new analytical technologies –
            both mathematical and computational – that will let us decipher
            the billions of data points associated with each individual. (Hood
            and Friend, 2011)                                
      20. See: http://ercim-news.ercim.eu/en82/special/pathway-signatures
      21. This is the strap-line employed by Skye, Rupert Murdoch’s telecommuni-
         cations company, which encourages us all, no matter what, to ‘Believe in
         Better’.ElsewhereintheUKthereisachainofleisurecentresthatarecalled
         ‘Better’, a national insurance company that is called ‘More Than’ and
         Eurostar, the company that runs trains through the tunnel connecting the
         UK to continental Europe, deploys a campaign that employs the hashtag,
         ‘bettercloser’.ThereisaCanadianpharmaceuticalcompanythathasarange
         of products called Be.better; Nike’s current range of products includes a
         T-shirt with the slogan ‘bettering’ written across the front; the shoe and
         clothing company Timberland uses the advertising strap-line, ‘Best then.
         Better now’; the TSB (a UK bank) claims ‘Our TSB Classic Plus account,
         just got plusser’; the Wellcome Museum in London invites us in with the
         slogan ‘More than ever’; the i-Phone 6 is described as ‘bigger than bigger’;
         a recent advertisement for an electric car (an Audi) insists, ‘Like a car,
         but better’.                                        
      22. See: https://www.optimizely.com                    
      23. See: http://www.gocompare.com/ps/homepage/2.aspx/?Media¼GG001&P
         ST¼1&device¼c&PST¼1&gclid¼Cj0KEQjwwYK8BRC0ta6LhOPC0v0BE
         iQApv6jYX5FTYS1gIsxfMkzlNlsaIMdTDT1Y7KLjtZwIIP8Y0MaAvBY8
         P8HAQ                                               
      24. It is hard to avoid drawing a parallel with Althusser’s (1971) discussion of
         interpellation: the policeman who calls out ‘Hey, you there’. Althusser’s
         approach draws on Lacan’s various discussions of the mirror stage, a
         form of pausing in which infants encounter an external sense of coherence,
         producing a sense of ‘I’ and ‘you’, that comes to represent a permanent
         structure of alienation for Lacan.                  
      25. A paradigmatic example is the recent successful filing of a patent by
         Amazon for a method of speculative or anticipatory shipping. See
         Coleman (2017).                                     

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 35      
                                                             
        26. In marketing and many policy fields, for example, the design of optimal
          pathwaysisinformedbybehaviouraleconomics,inwhichdoingisdeployed
          as a measure of being. In the terms of our analysis, ‘nudging’ is the identi-
          fication and operation of constraints that can manipulate constraints, and
          the current investment by business and government in a ‘context-aware’
          computational infrastructure seems designed to support the rise of person-
          alization as a mode of individuation that will afford the possibility of
          dynamic stratification.                            
        References                                           
        AgambenG(1998)HomerSacer:SovereignPowerandBareLife.Stanford,CA:
         Stanford University Press.                          
        Agamben G (2011) The Signature of All Things: On Method. Cambridge: Zone
         Books, MIT Press.                                   
        Althusser L (1971) Lenin and Philosophy and other Essays, trans. Brewster B.
         New York: Monthly Review Press.                     
        Amoore L and Piotukh V (2015) Life beyond big data: Governing with little
         analytics. Economy and Society 44(3): 341–366.      
        ArvidssonA(2016)Facebookandfinance:Onthesociallogicofthederivative.
         Theory, Culture & Society 33(6): 3–23.              
        Badiou A (2008) Number and Numbers. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Bateson G (1999) Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago
         Press.                                              
        BourdieuP(1987)Distinction:ASocialCritiqueoftheJudgementofTaste,trans.
         Nice R. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.    
        BowkerGC(2014)Bigdata,bigquestions:Thetheory/datathing.International
         Journal of Communication 8(2043): 1795–1799. Available at: https://ijoc.org/
         index.php/ijoc/article/view/2190 (accessed: 12 December 2018).
        Canguilhem G (1991) The Normal and the Pathological, trans. Fawcett C.
         Cambridge: Zone Books, MIT Press.                   
        Chun WHK (2011) Programmed Visions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        ChunWHK(2016)UpdatingtoRemaintheSame.Cambridge,MA:MITPress.
        Coleman R (2017) Developing speculative methods to explore speculative ship-
         ping: Mail art, futurity and empiricism. In: Wilkie A, Savransky M and
         Rosengarten M (eds) Speculative Research: The Lure of Possible Futures.
         London: Routledge.                                  
        Day S, Lury C and Wakeford N (2014) Number ecologies: Numbers and num-
         bering practices. Distinktion 15(2): 123–154.       
        Dourish P (2014) No SQL: The shifting materialities of database technology.
         Computational Culture 4.                            
        Esposito E (2013) Economic circularities and second-order observation: The
         reality of ratings. Sociologica 2: 1–20.            
        Fenves P (2002) Arresting Language: From Leibniz to Benjamin. Stanford, CA:
         Stanford University Press.                          
        Feuz M, Fuller M and Stalder F (2011) Personal web searching in the age of
         semantic capitalism: Diagnosing the mechanisms of personalisation. First
         Monday 16(2, 7 February).                           
        Foucault M (1991) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans.
         Sheridan A. Harmondsworth: Penguin.                 

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      36                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(2)
                                                             
      FoucaultM(2001)TheOrderofThings:AnArchaeologyoftheHumanSciences.
        Abingdon: Routledge.                                 
      Fourcade M and Healy K (2013) Classification situations: Life-chances in the
        neoliberal era. Accounting, Organizations and Society 38(8): 559–572.
      FrowJ(2002)Signatureandbrand.In:CollinsJ(ed.)High-pop:MakingCulture
        into Popular Entertainment. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 56–74.
      GerlitzCandHelmondA(2013)Thelikeeconomy:Socialbuttonsandthedata-
        intensive web. New Media & Society 15(8): 1348–1365. 
      Gerlitz C and Lury C (2014) Social media and self-evaluating assemblages: On
        numbers, orderings and values. Distinktion 15(2): 174–188.
      Guyer J (2010) The eruption of tradition: On ordinality and calculation.
        Anthropological Theory 10(1–2): 123–131.             
      Hacking I (1991) How should we do the history of statistics? In: Burchell G,
        Gordon C and Miller P (eds) The Foucault Effect. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press.                                       
      Hayles KN (2002) Writing Machines. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      HaylesKN(2014)Cognitioneverywhere:Theriseofthecognitivenonconscious
        and the costs of consciousness. New Literary History 45(2): 199–220.
      Heintz B and Vollmer H (2011) Globalizing comparisons: Performance meas-
        urement and the ‘numerical difference’ in global governance. Available at:
        http://citation.allacademic.com//meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/5/0/0/4/
        8/pages500487/p500487-1.php.                         
      HoodLandFriendSH(2011)Predictive,personalized,preventive,participatory
        (P4) cancer medicine. Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology 8: 184–187.
      Jakobson R (1971 [1957]) Shifters, verbal categories, and the Russian verb. In:
        Selected Writings, vol. II: Word and Language. The Hague: Mouton.
      KaldrakIandRo¨hleT(2014)Divideandshare:Taxonomies,ordersandmasses
        in Facebook’s Open Graph. Computational Culture 4.   
      Kauffman S (2000) Investigations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Lacan J (1977) E´crits: A Selection, trans. Sheridan A. London: Tavistock.
      Lezaun J, Marres N and Tironi M (2016) Experiments in participation.
        In: Miller C, Smitt-Doer E, Felt U and Fouche R (eds) Handbook of
        Science and Technology Studies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 195–222.
      Mackenzie A (2014) Multiplying numbers differently: An epidemiology of con-
        tagious convolution. Distinktion: Journal of Social Theory 15(2): 189–207.
      MateoJ,CarreiraS,SandhuSetal.(2015)DNA-repairdefectsandOlaparibin
        metastatic prostate cancer. New England Journal of Medicine online 29
        October.                                             
      Neyland D (2014) On organizing algorithms. Theory, Culture & Society 32(1):
        119–132.                                             
      Parisi L (2013) Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics and Space.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                            
      PreyR(2017)Nothingpersonal:Algorithmicindividuationonmusicstreaming
        platforms. Media, Culture & Society 40(7): 1086–1100.
      Rabinow P (2009) Marking Time: On the Anthropology of the Contemporary.
        Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.           
      Raunig G (2015) Dividuum, Machinic Capitalism and Molecular Revolution,
        trans. Derieg A. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.           

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Lury and Day                                 37      
                                                             
        Ruppert E (2011) Population objects: Interpassive subjects. Sociology 45(2):
         218–233.                                            
        Seaver N (2012) Algorithmic recommendations and synaptic functions. Limn 2,
         Crowds and Clouds.                                  
        Seaver N (2015) The nice thing about context is that everyone has it. Media,
         Culture & Society 37(7): 1101–1109.                 
        Simondon G (1992) The genesis of the individual. In: Crary J and Kwinter S
         (eds) Incorporations. Cambridge: Zone Books, MIT Press, pp. 297–319.
        Stafford BM (2001) Visual Analogy: Consciousness as the Art of Connecting.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
        Strathern M (1998) The Gender of the Gift. Berkeley: University of California
         Press.                                              
        Tkacz N (2014) Wikipedia and the Politics of Mind. Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press.                                      
        TotaroPandNinnoD(2014)Theconceptofalgorithmasaninterpretivekeyof
         modern rationality. Theory, Culture & Society 31(4): 29–49.
        Totaro P and Ninno D (2016) Algorithms and the practical world. Theory,
         Culture & Society 33(1): 139–152.                   
        Urton G (1997) The Social Life of Numbers: A Quechua Ontology of Numbers
         and Philosophy of Arithmetic. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
        Verran H (2010) Number as an inventive frontier in knowing and working
         Australia’s water resources. Anthropological Theory 10(1): 171–178.
        Verran H (2011) The changing lives of measures and values: From centre stage
         inthefading‘disciplinary’ societytopervasivebackgroundinstrument inthe
         emergent ‘control’ society. Sociological Review 59(2): 60–72.
        Celia Lury is Professor and Director of the Centre for Interdisciplinary
        Methodologies,WarwickUniversity.ThetopicofherESRCProfessorial
        Fellowship was ‘Order and Continuity: Methods for Change in a
        Topological Society’, ES/K010689/1.                  
        Sophie Day is Professor of Anthropology at Goldsmiths, and Visiting
        Professor at the School of Public Health, Imperial College London. She
        is currently working with Celia Lury and Helen Ward in a collaborative
        project, ‘People Like You’: Contemporary Figures of Personalisation
        (Wellcome Trust, 205456/Z/16/Z).                     
        This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on
        ‘Thinking with Algorithms: Cognition and Computation in the Work of
        N. Katherine Hayles’, edited by Louise Amoore.       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             