[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Article                                              
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2019,Vol.36(5)3–22
        Platform   Seeing:  Image                            
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2019
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
        Ensembles    and  Their                              
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276419847508
        Invisualities                      journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Adrian MacKenzie                                     
        Australian NationalUniversity                        
        Anna Munster                                         
        Universityof New SouthWales                          
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        How can one ‘see’ the operationalization of contemporary visual culture, given the
        imperceptibility and apparent automation of so many processes and dimensions of
        visuality? Seeing – as a position from a singular mode of observation – has become
        problematic since many visual elements, techniques, and forms of observing are
        highly distributed through data practices of collection, analysis and prediction.
        Such practices are subtended by visual cultural techniques that are grounded
        in the development of image collections, image formatting and hardware design.
        In this article, we analyze recent transformations in forms of prediction and data
        analyticsassociatedwithspectacularperformancesofcomputation.Weanalyzehow
        transformations in the collection and accumulation of images as ensembles by plat-
        forms have a qualitative and material effect on the emergent sociotechnicality of
        platform ‘life’ and ‘perception’. Reconstructing the visual transformations that
        allow artificial intelligence assemblages tooperateallows somesense oftheir heter-
        onomous materiality and contingency.                 
        Keywords                                             
        artificial intelligence architectures, Bergson, image ensembles, invisuality, platform
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Amid a flood of images enabled by the massification of ‘black box’
        mechanisms, cheaper display options and, for the first time, portable
        storage solutions, in 1896, Henri Bergson described both the universe
        and matter as an aggregate (ensemble in French) of images: ‘this aggre-
        gate[ensemble]ofimagesIcalltheuniverse’(Bergson,1991:18)or‘Icall
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:AnnaMarieMunster.Email:a.munster@unsw.edu.au
        ExtraMaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org/       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                             Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      mattertheaggregateofimages’(p.22).Bergsonwas,ofcourse,writingin
      the midst of the popularization of photography driven in part by
      Kodak’s 1888 release of its first Brownie box camera, and perhaps
      with the foresight that by 1900 there would already be more than
      100,000ofthesesold.ButBergson’sassertionhasturnedouttobesome-
      what prescient in the claim that image aggregates or ensembles are what
      comprise the matter of the world.                      
        In terms of sheer quantities of images, the trillions of photographs
      uploaded to platforms such as Google or Facebook exceed the limits
      of human visual imagining. But the notion – hinted at by Bergson in
      his concept of ‘ensemble’ – that images ‘aggregate’ through specific pro-
      cessesofassemblingtogetheriscrucialforunderstandingthereorganiza-
      tion of contemporary forms of knowing and perceiving. Prior to the
      action of a perceiving subject (or the ‘body’), Bergson proposed that
      ‘present’ images – by which we take him as meaning images directly
      registering as and generating material experience – acted upon each
      other to create ‘pathways’ or matter-flows:            
        Thatwhichdistinguishesitasapresentimage,asanobjectivereality,
        from a represented image is the necessity which obliges it to act
        through every one of its points upon all the points of all other
        images, to transmit the whole of what it receives, to oppose to
        every action an equal and contrary reaction, to be, in short, merely
        a road by which pass, in every direction, the modifications propa-
        gated throughout the immensity of the universe. (Bergson, 1991: 36)
      Such pathways, considered as an ensemble, might begin to provide us
      with a sense of actual nonhuman, inorganic processes as generative tech-
      nical forces of experience. If today images have not only become ubiqui-
      tous but, as we will suggest, are increasingly mattering for a new kind of
      (socio)technicity,wesuggestitisusefultorevisitBergsonasatouchstone
      for a different take on the ontogenesis of images. Here we reconsider
      Bergsonviamorecontemporaryapproachestotheontologyandtechnics
      of images. As Gregory Flaxman has argued, Bergson’s ‘aggregate of
      images’ is about simultaneously understanding matter as plastic and
      flux, the world’s mode and manner of presenting itself (2000: 92).
      World and image are therefore inseparable even as they constantly
      change. Acts of perception are what, instead, cut into this plastic mass,
      producingcertainkindsof‘framing’orwaysofperceiving‘the’image.In
      reconsidering contemporary image aggregates as ensembles – for exam-
      ple, datasets made available for platforms – we take up a Bergsonian
      ontology in two different ways. First, continuing along the lines of
      approaches such as Flaxman’s, we pursue a generative and presenta-
      tional mode of thinking images as matter. In particular, we will argue
      that image datasets as ensembles have a generative force for organizing
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                         5      
                                                             
        allkindsofplatformculturalactionsandforms.Wealsotakeaccountof
        recentworkbyauthorssuchasLucianaParisi(2013),whicharguesfora
        specific generativity for technical entities, such as algorithms, that is
        nonsensuous. Hence for images to matter in contemporary computation,
        they must be understood as entities in a computational relationality.
        Second, we emphasize the importance of the formatting of image ensem-
        blesasdatasets acrosscontemporarydatapractices;theincorporation of
        platforms into hardware in devices; forms of parallel computation; and
        the computational architectures of contemporary artificial intelligence.
        These assemblages constitute the (nonhuman) activities of perception as
        mode of cutting into/selecting out of the entire flux of image-ensemble-
        world. In a different but not unrelated context, Orit Halpern suggests
        that first order cybernetics – especially Norbert Weiner’s conception of
        both human and machine systems and Warren McCulloch’s early work
        on neural networks – seized on a Bergsonian conflation of thought with
        action and perception, suggesting that ‘viewing complex actions out of
        accumulated systematic behavior of networked neurons puts the empha-
        sis on the process, or algorithmic pattern that facilitated processing, and
        viewed this processing as productive in itself’ (2015: 56). Our approach
        here is not to detail the actual historical uptake of Bergson in technical
        developments, as Halpern so elegantly traces. Instead we ask: how can
        wethinkwiththeBergsonianimageensembleatatimewhenimagesboth
        lose their stability and uniqueness yet gather aggregated force?
         For forms of artificial intelligence driven by contemporary neural net-
        work architectures (and for now these seem to outweigh any other algo-
        rithmic logic operating on platforms), an ensemble of images in the
        broadest sense matters greatly. At every level of platforms, ranging
        from chip architectures to display devices, from data centre architectures
        to mobile phone ‘platforms-on-a-chip’, signs of a realignment around
        image ensembles can be seen. Platforms are made up of levels, and
        changes in one level flow through to others. Bergson’s original concep-
        tion of image-matter was as relational entity – an ensemble. Today, we
        propose, it is the image ensemble – images, not simply quantified, but
        labelled, formatted and made ‘platform-ready’ – that enables the emer-
        genceofanewmodeofperception,andindeedareformulationofvisual-
        ity itself. We call this platform seeing.1           
         These contemporary image ensembles are not simply quantitatively
        beyond our imagining but qualitatively not of the order of representa-
        tion.Theiroperativitycannotbeseenbyanobserving‘subject’butrather
        is enacted via observation events distributed throughout and across
        devices, hardware, human agents and artificial networked architectures
        such as deep learning networks.                      
         HerewewillalsotakeupBergson’sindistinctionatthelevelofsubject-
        object determination between the image ensemble and perception.
        For him, a point we argue later in this article, perception amounts

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                             Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      only to a mode of acting upon the image ensemble in order to make a
      temporary cut or selection. This is an argument used by Louise Amoore
      and Volha Piotukh (2015) in their work on the ways in which certain
      kinds of analytical functions and processes come to count as modes of
      giving specific form to big data. Amoore and Piotukh, however, are
      interested in the ways in which Bergsonian perception can be deployed
      in relation to big data and its analytics, shifting attention to the quali-
      tativetransformations performedbyfunctions,algorithmsanddataana-
      lysis on the seeming ontological homogeneity of ‘data’.2 Our purposes
      are aligned but differ in their focus. We will argue that image ensembles
      have a qualitative and material effect on the contouring of the emergent
      sociotechnicality of both platform ‘life’ and ‘perception’; that is, at the
      conjunction of image ensembles and artificial intelligence architectures,
      devices and hardware, platform seeing transpires as a new mode of invi-
      sual perception. Such a mode suggests that while visual techniques and
      practices continue to proliferate – from data visualization through to
      LIDAR technologies for capturing nonoptical images – the visual itself
      as a paradigm for how to see and observe is being evacuated, and that
      space is now occupied by a different kind of perception. This is not
      simply ‘machine vision’, we argue, but a making operative of the visual
      by platforms themselves.                               
        Inthecontextofdebatesinvisualculturaltheory,softwareandscience
      studies about the status of the image and the performance of algorithms
      asculture,weattendinsteadtoensembles;platforms;tothespecificityof
      algorithmic processes; and to the conjunction of algorithm with device
      hardware. We want to suggest that the conjunctions between image
      ensembles and new modes of observing fundamentally challenge the
      claim for an ‘autonomy’ of computer vision associated primarily with
      artificial intelligence and its technical achievements. We suggest that the
      abundance of devices for producing images, together with the invisuality
      of platform seeing, create new opacities that even the most advanced
      seeing-devices – the machine learning-based predictive models used to
      organize and order image flows – cannot dispel. The imperative to
      make visible the invisible, so prominent within data science, data-
      inflected design and big data-driven commerce, may well be out of
      sync with the novel formations rendered by a radical platforming of
      visual culture.                                        
      Ensembles                                              
      Glance through any contemporary data science article or developer’s
      blog post on deep learning networks and you will quickly glean that
      imagesarediscussedinquantitativetermsthatoverwhelminglyobliterate
      any sense of their uniqueness, indexicality, or their perceptual or phe-
      nomenological experience. ‘Millions of training examples’ and ‘an
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                         7      
                                                             
        endless stream of new impressions’ (Mordvintsev et al., 2015), or ‘we
        trained for a total of 50 million frames’ (Mnih et al., 2015: 524) are
        typical phrases scattered across research reportage on contemporary
        forms of artificial intelligence (AI). These forms of AI are driven by
        deep learning architectures, in which images seem to function merely
        as a communicative baseload that might power new ‘visions’ for auto-
        mated and autonomous decision-making and task performance. Ever
        since Google loaded 10 million YouTube thumbnails of cats into its
        neural network architecture in 2012, the conception that what an AI
        needs to learn to become more proficient is ‘more (image) data’ has
        taken hold.                                          
         Wemayindeedhavebecomeusedtothemathematicalsublimeunder-
        pinningtheterm‘bigdata’throughGoogle’scat-loadedartificialbrainor
        by Facebook’s facial recognition review and tagging features of its hun-
        dreds of billions of users’ photos. But we have paid less attention to the
        imagistic nature of all this data. How has this collecting, formatting and
        processingofimages–undertakenbyemergingsoftware,hardwaretech-
        niques and processes that constitute a broader AI assemblage – affected
        what we understand of ‘the’ image and of observation today? We will
        suggest that attention to images as not just quantitative aggregates but
        rather as ensembles is needed in order to understand, first, how new
        forms of AI are assembling across technical, social and economic plat-
        forms; and, second, how indeed a new mode of nonrepresentational
        observation has become ascendant that we propose is invisual. Here,
        observation operates in and through the image but is not of the order
        of the visual.                                       
         Debates around contemporary images, especially scientific as well as
        media and entertainment ones, have often struggled with the problem of
        how to make sense of their abundance, as well as their increasingly
        opaque and obscure relations with referentiality. They have, however,
        rarely paid attention to the consistency and relationality of images as
        collections or sets. Critical theorists have long observed and commented
        ontheincreasingintimacyofmachinesordeviceswithvision.Whetherin
        the Foucauldian-style approach of Jonathan Crary’s Techniques of the
        Observer (Crary, 1992), the exponential acceleration of seeing described
        inPaulVirilio’sTheVisionMachine(Virilio,1994),orthesystemiconto-
        logical transformation proposed in Martin Heidegger’s ‘The Age of the
        World Picture’ (1977), vision has been comprehensively described in
        terms of a machinic capture of seeing, and an increasing autonomy of
        vision techniques. Accounts of perception and visuality more attuned to
        practical transformations in seeing have tended to focus on shifts in the
        instrumentationofobjectivity,andcorrespondingre-configurationofthe
        position of observers and witnesses; for example, Lorraine Daston and
        PeterGalison’s (2007)workonobjectivity. But aretheseapproaches still
        relevant for the transformations currently taking place via emergent

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                             Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      assemblages of and for vision predicated on image collections, the situa-
      tional awareness being tasked for autonomous vehicles, or the Google
      DeepDream mission to evolve not simply intelligent but imaginative
      machines?                                              
        Drawing on science studies, visual cultural theory and software stu-
      dies, this article explores some concrete settings and situations in which
      seeing (large collections) of images occurs today. We are especially inter-
      estedintheaggregationofimagesaroundandthroughthemodellingand
      predictive practices of deep learning since this field of technical practice
      comes into being in association with image ensembles. Within data
      science, it has been taken for granted that ‘big data’ must both be furn-
      ished for and be an artefactual consequence of the effective and robust
      training of deeplearning AIs or‘models’ (for example, Najafabadi et al.,
      2015). Yet the pervasiveness of image data throughout all domains in
      which models are being trained – even, for example, where the modality
      being trained for is aural and the domain being mined is music (for
      example, Jansson et al., 2017) – is startling, albeit often glossed over.
        Our interest here in exploring the exchange between images and emer-
      ging platform assemblages is not to examine the onslaught of a mono-
      lithic ‘algorithmic culture’ (see Pasquale, 2015), figured either as
      algorithmic intelligence or dystopian vision of cultural expropriation
      (for example, the dystopianism of China’s new social credit system that
      will be shaped and coordinated algorithmically). Instead, our approach
      will be to ask how large-scale collections of images, their persistent pro-
      cessing by everyday devices, their storage and analysis by media and
      hardware platforms from Google to NVidia and more, and their
      agency as (iterative) training grounds for deep learning networks, allow
      them to operationalize both a new mode of observing and new agence-
      mentforvisualitythatwearecallingplatformseeing.Herewedeploythe
      term agencement in its original French following Deleuze and Guattari
      whounderstoodtheworkdonebyanagencementasincreasingthemulti-
      plicity of its conceptual and social (and aesthetic) dimensions as it
      expands and changes its agencies via connections with other machines
      both technical and social (Deleuze and Guattari, 2005: 8). We see this as
      important in the context of our arguments concerning platform seeing
      sincebothplatforms and deeplearning areenactive machinic agentsthat
      produceintensiveandextensivesociotechnicalmultiplicitiesastheyoper-
      ate. The functions being performed by and on images as they are pre-
      cisely formatted for inputting to models and in many cases labelled, as
      theyareprocessedandusedtoconfiguresmallneuralnetworksonboard
      smartphones, and as they move from the devices of consumers to plat-
      forms and their data centres and back, transform them from bearers of
      indexical relations to elements within operational (image) collections.
      Along the way, images as unique bearers of content or expression finally
      give way to a multiplicative matrix of visual transformations. What

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                         9      
                                                             
        counts for platform seeing are images’ capacities to yield and supply
        efficient edge detection, contrast ratios and recognizable compositional
        elements at immense scale and mobility.              
         The corollary to this reallocation of the image into particular kinds of
        ensembles that have become operative for deep learning architectures
        and the platforms they now enable is that it is impossible to see this
        operativity in any holistic or meta-observational display. The massive
        flows and iterations of images across and within devices, platforms and
        deep learning models are plat-formatted in operation. What do we mean
        by ‘plat-formatted’? Take again Facebook’s processing of its users’
        uploaded photos. These function simultaneously as content for users to
        share in social networks, data to train Facebook’s image recognition
        models, a ‘smart’ collection able to serve selections via ‘genre’ (baby
        photos, pet action shots and so on) back to its users, and a portal into
        everydaylifeviaitsmobileappMoments.Thisnetworked‘image’collec-
        tion is made possible by the intermediating agency – at once technical,
        cultural, economic and political – of the platform as ongoing operations
        that transform, order and circulate. Yet these multiple intermediations
        cut off the capacity to single-handedly or even collectively observe these,
        often, imperceptible movements, passes and processings of images.
        Seeing is performed by a multitude of human and computational
        agents whose ‘vision’ passes across and along platforms, eluding any
        singular coordinating position, and heterogeneously conjoining things
        andpractices.Imagesasensemblesbothheedandfeedthetechnocultural
        logic of platforms; platforms are expanding into perception agencements
        via the contemporary operations of large-scale image collections and
        flows.                                               
        Platforms                                            
        Ironically, the formatting of operations, as various visual processes and
        materials pass transversally through platforms, cuts off the ability to see
        across, look at, or step back and observe the vast array of contemporary
        distributed imaging operations. The platform itself clears visuality of
        such ‘oversight’. Today, devices themselves perform many of the opera-
        tions through which observation becomes (a) distributed event. Indeed,
        some devices specifically integrate distributed observation events by
        embedding the platform as their design matrix. The smart phone
        camera, for example, incorporates an entire raft of processes dedicated
        toandenabling(data)visualizationthataredistributedacrossitsvarious
        sensorsandchips.Wemightthereforebegintothinkofthesmartcamera
        as a device that supports an entire ecology of platform seeing practices,
        and we will unpack this a little later. But while now immanent to the
        camera, the platform nonetheless does not furnish a ‘viewing’ position
        from where, even at microcosmic scale, imaging operations can
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      themselvesbe‘seen’intotal.Bythis,wemeanthatthereisnopositionor
      place from which an ‘observing subject’ could view the ensemble of
      operations of image processing; either such operations are too small,
      since they take place on a microprocessor such as the image sensor of
      a camera; or they are too large, since the image’s operativity only
      becomes clear by moving in a multi-scalar manner: across image data-
      bases, GPU arrays, server farms and data centres.      
        Platform ‘seeing’, we’d like to propose, is operative – only ever pro-
      duced through the distributed events and technocultural processes per-
      formed by, on and as image collections are engaged by deep learning
      assemblages.Suchdistributionisbothalogisticaloperationbyplatforms
      – Facebook, Apple via CoreML, NVidia, to name only a few – and an
      actualplat-formattingofobservation.Fromnow,seeing,asacontinually
      mobilized set of perceptual and machinic operations, is re-configured via
      the generating, processing, and distribution of image data. The format-
      ting and databasing of images, the re-formatting of image data as recog-
      nizable patterns through deep learning models and the re-assemblage of
      such patterns as predictive mechanisms for the very near future are all
      operationsofplatformseeing.Platforms,however,donotprofferaloca-
      tion for (a) single oversight.                         
        We focus on three pivotal platform features: the platform as image
      collecting apparatus, machine learning algorithms as images of platform
      operations, and platforms as image-forms (what we will later term ‘plat-
      formatting’). Platforms include devices (for example, games consoles or
      smart phones or satellites), instruments (medical scanners, for instance),
      and distributed systems (social media). The concept of platform has a
      complex relation to media regulation (Gillespie, 2010), to knowledge
      (imaging platforms associated with Keating and Cambrosio, 2003), and
      to an ever-expanding range of economic activities (Srnicek, 2016;
      McAfee and Brynjolfsson, 2017). Platforms constitute a privileged
      space of relationality between different groups and forms of belonging.
      Across all platforms, the problem of their relation to capitalism and, in
      particular, the ongoing structuring of things as assets capable of gener-
      ating revenue streams (Doganovam and Muniesa, 2015), is writ large.
      Platform-specific image collections are primary assets. Many social
      media platforms amass vast collections of images generated by phones
      andcameras.Althoughtheseimageswereinitiallycollectedaspartofthe
      archivallogicofsocialmediaplatforms(Hogan,2015b),thosecollections
      have now begun to take on a different value as future-oriented assets.
        Althoughitisrarelymentionedassuch,criticalinterestinproblemsof
      algorithmic accountability or agency (Kitchin, 2017; Aradau and
      Kaufmann, 2017; Neyland, 2016; Sandvig et al., 2014) follows in the
      wake of a significant re-configuration of platform algorithms. A diverse
      ecology of algorithms for sorting, counting, searching, finding, naming,
      ordering, and calculating things has accumulated around digital

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        11      
                                                             
        platforms,butthealgorithmsthatcurrentlywarrantcriticalattentionare
        particularlyconcernedwithpredictiveoperations.Oneprobleminunder-
        standing the work of ‘algorithmic culture’ (Hallinan and Striphas, 2014)
        or ‘algorithms as culture’ (Gillespie, 2017; Seaver, 2017) is that
        they largely overlook the image-centred logics of these changes. The
        polymorphous shifts in the algorithms should beframed, we are suggest-
        ing, by the large image collections on which platforms increasingly
        capitalize. Predictive work with images also has a close association
        with platforms.                                      
                                                             
        Images: ‘Only the Pixels’                            
        Demonstrations of machine seeing associated with science, internet
        media,andgovernmentrelyoncollectionsofimagesformattedforobser-
        vation by neural networks. The existence of the collection, ensemble or
        aggregateofimagesiscrucialtothemodel/AI.Aswehavealreadynoted,
        Bergson assumes a plurality of images as world. In his pre-perceptual
        account (in the sense of perception understood as framing), images can
        be recast as a fluxing signal ensemble, an assembly of pathways that can
        be traversed in many different ways. Crucially for our purposes, acts of
        seeing or observation in the form of perceptions are provisionally stabi-
        lizedderivativesoftheimageensemble,anddonotdifferfromtheensem-
        ble except in their connection to potential movements of observers (see
        also Flaxman, 2000: 94). Picture representations – images in the familiar
        sense–onlydiffer,inturn,intheirdegreeofconnectionordisconnection
        to potential action. An image in the form of a photograph, for Bergson
        (1991: 38–9), merely has a greater degree of virtualization of potential
        action than human visual perception.                 
         Whathappensifwestartfromtheprimacyofimageensembles?Take,
        forexample,DeepMind,theLondon-baseddeeplearningstartupbought
        by Google Corporation in 2015. DeepMind’s activities – creating power-
        ful game-playing artificial agents, reducing energy consumption in
        Google data centres, and working with Moorfields Eye Hospital on ana-
        lysing OCT (Optical Coherence Tomography) eyescans – span media,
        industry and medicine. The contrast between game playing, data centre
        energy management, and eye disease already suggests a certain mobility
        or translatability of the techniques and devices that DeepMind has been
        developing; that is, deep learning neural networks combined with rein-
        forcementlearning.Thesesettings,wesuggest,sharetheconfigurationof
        theplat-formattedimageensemble.And,inspiteofthedifferentkindsof
        imaging processes – high resolution eyescans or small thumbnails – all
        kinds of images must be gathered together in a way that makes them
        both model readable and platform ready.              
         In 2016, DeepMind entered AlphaGo, the Go-playing system, in a
        match against the world’s leading human Go player, Lee Sedol in
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      Seoul. AlphaGo won the Go tournament. This success has been widely
      seen as a sign of a historic step towards artificial intelligence. It has less
      often been recognized that AlphaGo’s relation to the game of Go is not
      based on any abstract game intelligence, but on a vast archive of images
      of previous gamesof Go engineeredimagistically to format movesin Go
      games.InapaperdescribingAlphaGopublishedinNature,thedesigners
      and engineers directly point to an image ensemble:     
        Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved unprecedented
        performance in visual domains.... They use many layers of neu-
        rons, each arranged in overlapping tiles, to construct increasingly
        abstract,localizedrepresentationsofanimage.Weemployasimilar
                                                             
        architecture for the game of Go. We pass in the board position as a
        19(cid:2)19 image. (Silver et al., 2016: 484)        
      As Silver and co-authors describe it, AlphaGo deploys an architecture
      developed for ‘visual domains’ (face and object recognition) by treating
      Goboardpositionsas19x19pixelimagesnapshots.WhentheDeepMind
      scientists write ‘construct increasingly abstract, localized representations
      of an image’, we might bear in mind that the neural networks represent
      bycreatingnewimagesembodiedaslayersofdifferentzonesintheimage
      ensembles. Atcore,deepneuralnetworksare‘exploiting thelocalspatial
      correlations present in images, and building in robustness to natural
      transformationssuchaschangesofviewpointorscale’(Mnih,2015:529).
        We draw attention here especially to the primacy of image ensembles;
      themodeltrainedviatheDeepMindplatform‘learns’byobservingmany
      images. AlphaGo acts in the world to the extent that local spatial corre-
      lationscanbeassociated with actionsandrewards forthoseactions. The
      development of these systems centres on many cycles of observation
      followed by action. This cycling through observation and action consti-
      tutes the ‘training’ of the model; a training that seemingly requires very
      little ‘prior knowledge’ on the part of the model since it only receives
      pixels and game scores as input.                       
      Diagram                                                
      How should we think of the millions of images that AlphaGo processes?
      While the researchers at DeepMind refer to ‘abstract, localized represen-
      tations of images’ (Silver et al., 2016: 484) or deriving ‘efficient represen-
      tations of the environment from high-dimensional sensory inputs and
      [using] these to generalize past experience to new situations’ (Mnih
      et al., 2015: 529), are the models embodied as AlphaGo representations
      of images? The difficulty in understanding them as representations of
      images is that the representations ‘act through’ themselves in ways that
      cannotberepresented.Therepresentationoftheimagesmovingenmasse
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        13      
                                                             
        through AlphaGo Zero cannot itself be effectively presented as a repre-
        sentation, or at least not without another model, or a series of technical
        diagrams. Any talk of ‘abstract representations’ is misleading here. The
        model trained on an image collection is rather more like an image as
        describedbyBergson,acting‘througheveryoneofitspointsuponallthe
        points of all other images, to transmit the whole of what it perceives’
        (Bergson, 1991: 36). It is possible to comprehend the complex and
        dynamic configuration of these devices (through ‘training’ techniques
        thatoptimizeparameterstoreduceerrorratesonsubsequentpredictions)
        asderiving‘efficientrepresentationsoftheenvironment’where‘theenvir-
        onment’ is something that can be rendered as an image collection. The
        combination of different techniques such as convolutional neural nets
        brought to bear on image collections creates a ‘present image’, but one
        that does not primarily work as representation of the world but ‘pro-
        duce[s]anewkindofreality,anewmodeloftruth’,asGillesDeleuzeand
        Felix Guattari put it (1994: 36), a model whose novel reality lies in the
        ensemble. In other words, machine learning systems such as AlphaGo
        operate diagrammatically, re-flowing relations in the image ensembles,
        generating materialities and experiences in their wake.
         The analytical challenge for contemporary theory is to reframe the
        operations of such machines in ways that allow this primary and over-
        flowing diagrammatic dimension associated with image collections to
        appear in less abstract, less representational ways. The challenge is
        to understand them as situated, operative and as generative of new
        kinds of actualities. Amoore and Piotukh use Bergson to re-frame data
        analytic systems in terms of attenuated forms of perception (2015: 360).
        By contrast, we want to suggest that there is something more transversal
        happening in image aggregates. The transformations of images via a
        machine such as AlphaGo Zero are not so much technical (although as
        alwaysthereisamazeoftechnicaldetailstonavigate)butdiagrammatic.
        ThezigzagrelationsbetweenacomplexAIarchitecturesuchasAlphaGo
        and other ‘machines’ generate transversal platform changes, to which we
        now turn.                                            
        Device                                               
        As platforms start to reorganize perception, our everyday vision
        machines – such as cameras – are also rapidly being plat-formatted
        (Plantin et al., 2018). Much theoretical and cultural work has been
        done on the actual images produced by smart phones – in particular
        recent critical media, photographic theory and software studies
        approaches to selfies. As Frosh (2015), Go´mez Cruz and Thornham
        (2015) and Levin (2014) have all saliently argued, the emergence of the
        ‘selfie’ as an image stream rather than mere photographic practice is
        indebted to the place of the image within much larger networked
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      media flows. Scholarship on smart photography largely revolves around
      the techniques and technics enabled by the phone’s front-facing camera.
      Nonetheless, all this research still emanates from conceiving both image
      asrepresentational andhumansubjectasthemainperceiverwithinthese
      flows. With the exception of SarahKember’s (2014) work onthe ways in
      which ‘smart’ photography emerges out of a re-assembling of imaging,
      informaticstechniquesandbiopower,littleworkhasyetbeencarriedout
      on imaging operations in devices.                      
        Yet a camera is no longer an image-taking device but rather an entire
      sensing ‘platform’ capable of carrying out the distribution and integra-
      tion of different forms of processing. A device, then, becomes another
      location for the generation of image ensembles. But if the camera in
      general has moved from imaging to sensing device (Yoshida, 2015), it
      isthesmartphonecamerathathasemergedasaconjunctionforplatform
      architectures and movements. The smartphone plus camera really dis-
      covered its operativity in 1997, when Philippe Kahn, a Silicon Valley
      technology developer, shared a photo of his baby by using his own
      wireless sharing software and a camera, both of which he integrated to
      function with his mobile phone. This was based upon a proto-platform
      web architecture: ‘a web/notification system that was capable of upload-
      ingapictureandtextannotationssecurelyandreliablyandsendinglink-
      backsthroughemailnotificationstoastoredlistonaserverandallowing
      listmemberstocomment’(Kahn,2017).Kahn’srecollectionsunderscore
      howmobilephone-generatedimagecultureprovidesthepathwaysforthe
      aggregation of web-servers and mobile phones into platforms.
        As a number of technical and theoretical histories have noted, the in-
      phone camera developed primarily as a sensor of images rather than as
      an optical device for focusing light (Yoshida, 2015; Chesher, 2017). An
      image sensor isitself already a mini-workstation for image processing: in
      veryrecenthighresolutiondigitalcameras,sensorsarepanchromaticand
      arranged in an array. The position of sensors in the array conveys infor-
      mationabouttheamountoflightbeingrecorded.Inslightlyolderdigital
      cameras (2015 and before), sensors also occupy a mosaic grid but addi-
      tionally use a ‘Bayer’ mask of 50 percent green, 25 percent red and 25
      percentbluetofilterthelightbeingreceived.Inbothcases,itcanbeseen
      that a sensor does not merely receive light but processes light quantities
      alongside or in tandem with other information. Further processing then
      takes place, in the case of the co-operativity of sensor and Bayer filter,
      using ‘demosaicing’, a mode of interpolating the colour information of
      neighbour sensor elements to generate the digital image. As part of this
      new formation of plat-formatted seeing, in-camera ‘observers’ have
      become miniaturized to the level of individual sensor-pixel components.
      ‘Higher’levelsofobservationmightthenbe‘filledin’algorithmically(see
      also Rubinstein and Sluis, 2013).                      
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        15      
                                                             
         The shift from recording to sensing is not confined to smart phone
        cameras.Butimagequantityandqualityfromcameraphonesaccelerated
        early research on the camera’s image sensor and fundamental processing
        capabilities. In order to resolve some ongoing smartphone photography
        issues such as motion blur and poor quality image capture in low light,
        image signal processors (ISPs) have become part of the computational
        architecture of smart phones. The ISP does not just process signal from
        theimagesensorbutalsoreceivesdatafrom,forexample,thegyroscope,
        which provides image stabilization and combines both signals into the
        onedigitalimage.Thisassemblingofdifferentimagedatainputsthrough
        ISP chips, along with the capacity to generate digital images at standar-
        dized image resolution and size, creates a new kind of relationality
        among (smart phone) image ensembles that furnishes some of the con-
        ditions for machine learning-driven AI. Together with its networked
        connectivity, the smart phone offers a platform-ready form of imaging
        available for movement and distribution across and by the agencement
        that is platform seeing.                             
         The reverse also holds: the smart phone image with its in-camera/in-
        phone processing capacities functions as an element in and for the dis-
        tributed event of observation writ large. The multi-scalar pervasiveness
        of observers distributing and distributed across devices and image pro-
        cessing transforms the image from representational to purely processual.
        To return here to Bergson, processing is what acts throughout the image
        ensemble to actualize the ensemble’s movement toward a form of action
        that is radically invisual. Here, it is image processing that conditions the
        image ensemble as platform-ready data (see Alpaydin, 2016: 99–100),
        becoming the ‘input’ for plat-formatted deep learning architectures
        that drive, for example, Google’s Photos app.        
         TheincreasedrelianceonISPsinsmartphonestodeliverimagequality
        has become a hardware ‘hook’ for artificial intelligence to insert itself
        pervasively into everyday life, fostering a ubiquitous, platform-driven
        consumer-level deep learning. The A11 Bionic released in 2017, iPhone
        8’s chip, is optimized for image and video signal processing with a 64-bit
        and 6-coreprocessor. But itis also optimized to work formachine learn-
        ingusingApple’sCoreMLplatform.This‘platform’(inalocalizedsense)
        enhances image and facial recognition among its raft of AI capabilities,
        which also include object detection and natural language processing (see
        Shaji,2016).Hencetheeverydaycontemporaryimage-readydeviceofthe
        smart phone now forms part of the agencement that is platform seeing.
        Indeed, the platform has come home to roost in/on the phone with the
        entire device now becoming capable of ‘conjoint operations’: the proces-
        singofdatawiththedeliveryofdatastreamstoinstalledapps,withthese
        apps having been pre-trained using CoreML algorithms (see Newman,
        2017). Both Apple and Samsung have invested considerably in develop-
        ing proprietary ISPs, suggesting that plat-formatting moves both at the

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      level of and through the technical operation fundamental to contempor-
      ary data culture: image processing.                    
        At the same time, the ascension of machine learning-driven AI also
      means that new kinds of platforms cut through the operations of ima-
      ging,aswewillexploreinthenextsectionofthisarticleinrelationtothe
      shift in computation from central (CPU) to graphics processing units
      (GPUs). In the context of smart phone image processing, one example
      thatcomestomindhereistheforaythatthecompanyARMhasmadein
      to the smartphone market with the release of a new ISP in 2017 (Savov,
      2017). ARM had been providing many of the CPUs for iPhones, iPads,
      Samsung Galaxy devices, and Google Pixels. But their 2017 ISP, aimed
      attheChineseandsouthAsianmarketandembeddedinMeizu,Huawei,
      and Xiaomi phones, is a downsized iteration of their image recognition
      processors for autonomous vehicles. This suggests that the plat-format-
      ting of image processing also operates to generalize across both scales
      and domains in similar ways to how DeepMind performs conjunctions
      across gameplay and eye-scanning to generate the emergent agencement
      of platform seeing.                                    
      Architecture                                           
      Inordertograspthestructuraltextureofthechangingpositionofimages
      on and as platforms, we might turn to the other prominent strand of
      DeepMind’sworkthathasnotyetbeendiscussed:itsmodellingofenergy
      consumption in Google data centres. As in the case of platform and
      algorithm, a train of recent research has addressed the energy and envir-
      onmental implications of data platforms and digital media. Whether in
      calculations of the energy costs of a Google search or in the CO emis-
                                                 2           
      sions of Facebook information architecture, critical attention to energy
      has been one way of grounding changes in platforms in their localized
      materialities (Hogan, 2015a). Platforms such as Facebook and Google,
      and even Amazon, which for many years showed no regard for CO
                                                     2       
      emissions, attend closely to energy consumption, partly for reasons
      of cost and partly for reasons of brand. DeepMind’s modelling of
      Google’s data centre operating efficiency using the same neural
      networktechniquesdevelopedforAlphaGoanddeepQ-networksattests
      to this interest (Evans and Gao, 2016). While it would not be convincing
      to attribute improvements in efficiency to either the critical literature
      orthemachinelearningmodelsdevelopedbyDeepMind,theapplication
      of the image-based predictive models to data centre operations has
      an interesting recursivity to it. Platforms structurally change their
      own ensemble configurations today partly through such operational
      modelling.                                             
        Images animate the dynamism of platforms. Even if it is somewhat
      surprising that the same modelling techniques can be used to play Atari

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        17      
                                                             
        console games, Go, analyse eyes, drive the ‘smartness’ of digital photo-
        graphicpracticesoranalysedatacentrepowerconsumption,itisperhaps
        evenmorestrikingthatallofthesemodelsdependonthegraphicproces-
        sing units – GPUs – first developed as hardware accelerators for compu-
        tergamegraphicsintheearly1990s bytheTaiwanesechipmanufacturer
        NVidia.Thevisualcultureofreal-timedigitalanimationingameplayhas
        an unlikely or non-local relation to machine learning through GPUs,
        with their capacity to rendercalculation massively parallel. The architec-
        tureoftheGPU(barelymentionedinthescientificpublicationsinNature
        butdiscernibleintheirmethodssectionsandsomeofthetablesofresults)
        ischaracterizedbyseveralthousandidenticalcomputingcoresconnected
        inagrid onasinglechip.GPUarchitectures initiallyaddressed theoften
        subtle visual problems of texture and shading in computer graphics, but
        in the context of deep learning neural nets, the same architecture is con-
        cerned with a very different problem: the optimization of predictions
        through the process of training a model. GPU architecture, the silicon
        substrate of millions of first-person standpoint 3D action games, with
        their pursuit of detailed and fluidly mobile game physics, has developed
        to render images aggregately computable through massive calculative
        parallelism. Graphics processing units – as distinct from central proces-
        sing units that were the core of computation until only a few years ago –
        specializeinvastnumbersofdiscretearithmeticoperationscarriedoutin
        parallel lanes that generate images.                 
         Whereas graphics applications used calculation to render high resolu-
        tion shaded and textured-mapped images at speeds sufficient to support
        ‘real-time’ game play, the training of convolutional neural nets used in
        AlphaGo, Q-networks and other similar models direct most of the cal-
        culative capacity of the GPU to matrix multiplications of lower resolu-
        tion input data (images) and model parameters (the so-called ‘weights’).
        The architecture of deep learning neural nets is intricate, typically invol-
        ving a dozen or more distinct layers, each of which has thousands of
        elements with multiple parameters. While the images processed by
        AlphaGo are quite small (19x19 pixels), training the model entails
        many thousands of repeated adjustments of parameters over different
        image aggregates (sometimes training sets; sometimes subsets of larger
        aggregates; sometimes vast aggregates; sometimes combinations of all
        these), to reduce prediction errors.                 
         The techniques of training such models have intricate and heavily
        mathematical underpinnings, but nearly everything that happens in the
        construction of such models can be understood as reversing the flows of
        imageproductionthathavedefinedvisualityinrecentdecades.Insteadof
        generatingimages,thesemodelsobserveimages,theyconstructdiagram-
        matic abstractions of features common in images, and gather these loca-
        lized abstractions into predictive statements that can be operationalized
        as actions in theworld: ‘place ablack stone at g9(row 7,column 9)’.We

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      might think of the calculative observation of image collections as a gen-
      eralized visuality since the structure of the eye (in the work on eye dis-
      ease), the highly variable data power consumption of a data centre, edge
      detectionforenhancementofdigitalphotographs,oraseriesofmovesin
      agameofGoorMontezuma’sRevengealloperateaccordingtothesame
      logic: a large image collection allows a model to be trained given the
      computational capacity of GPUs. If computer vision now has ‘super-
      human’ capacities to recognize things and faces, this in effect amounts
      to a generalized seeing taking shape in which operational situations are
      observed and potentially changed in a similar way.     
      End: ‘Image’; Begin: ‘Images’                          
                                                             
      Engagement with the technical architectures of ISPs, GPUs and deep
      learning models offers a way to disinvest some of the numerical sublime
      that inflects responses to image aggregates, or indeed any ‘big’ data. Our
      centralconcerninthisarticlehasbeenimagecollectionsintheirplatform
      mode of existence as an index of an emergent platform seeing.
      Collections of images operate within and help form a field of distributed
      invisualityinwhichrelationsbetweenimagescountmorethananyindexi-
      calityoriconicityofanimage.Thisdistributedinvisualityconstitutesthe
      diagrammatic transversality that moves their mass. Bergson’s account of
      images as ensembles asks us to turn from the perceived image to images,
      bathing in a flux of associations. He treats perceived images as forms
      temporarily cut out of the mass and held steady. Invisual image ensem-
      blesmoveacrossanyclearcontrastsbetweeneye,lens,sensor,file,screen
      or database. The corollary of the processing of collections is that the
      platform itself as a raised, visible surface of intermediating cuts off the
      capacitytolookfromapositionbecauseitdistributesseeingtransversely:
      pixel,device,andhardwarearchitectureareconjoinedthroughtheopera-
      tions of this invisual diagram.                        
        Whataretheimplicationsofthisengagementforaccountsofplatforms,
      media and contemporary experience? We have approached the image
      ensemble from several different platform-related angles. First, we have
      sought to show in the case of the deep learning models epitomizing plat-
      formdataextraction–AlphaGo,Q-Network,etc.–thatimagecollections
      aretreatedaslarge-scalepatternsofassociationsbetweenfeatures.Second,
      in exploring the generalization of these architectures in environments that
      do not seem to be primarily image-based scenes, such as playing a board
      game, we have suggested that the platform-enabled modelling of associa-
      tions enhances the importance of image collections for platform operativ-
      ity. Third, in charting how the devices that produce images such as smart
      phones and cameras themselves undergo platformization, we have
      observed how image-sensing becomes the site of platform-derived predic-
      tiveoperations.Theseoperationsagainworktogeneratebaseloadflowsof
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        19      
                                                             
        images that generalize the image collections into a new kind of ensemble.
        Taking into account these different perspectives we have brought to bear
        oncontemporary‘image’operations,platformseeingstrivesforageneral-
        ized and multi-scalar yet precisely targeted vector destined to operationa-
        lize visuality wherever it lands.                    
                                                             
        Notes                                                
        1. Whyplatformseeing?ItisplatformssuchasAmazon,Google,Microsoftand
          many others who have been energetically marketing their image collections
          and the technical configurations needed to process them. But the recent re-
          emergence of AI owes much to platforms, and to their image ensembles.
          Machine learning, long pursued by researchers and engineers, suddenly
          gained traction and accelerated as ‘AI’. We could track how the AI ‘break-
          throughs’ of recent years stem from the image collections associated with
          sharing photos on the internet combined with the hardware (GPUs) devel-
          oped for computer gaming. This article begins this process of tracking how
          such breakthroughs occur by paying particular attention to the platform
          readiness of image datasets and the proliferation of the multi-levelling of
          all kinds of technical entities such as devices into platform.
        2. Amoore has also examined the ways in which cloud computing’s machinic
          vision acts on the world by rendering perceptible that which was previously
          imperceptible. Here she develops another aspect of Bergson’s ontogenetic
          approach to seeing by suggesting that human and machine are ‘organs’
          that function as a composite kind of perception (Amoore, 2018: 12).
        References                                           
        Alpaydin, Etham (2016) Machine Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Amoore, Louise (2018) Cloud geographies: Computing, data, sovereignty.
         Progress in Human Geography 42(1): 4–24.            
        Amoore, Louise and Piotukh, Volha (2015) Life beyond big data: Governing
         with little analytics. Economy and Society 44(3): 341–366.
        Aradau,AradauandKaufmann,Mareile(2017)Politicsofprediction.European
         Journal of Social Theory 20(3): 373–391.            
        Bergson, Henri (1991) Matter and Memory. New York: Zone Books.
        Chesher, Chris (2017). BetweenImage andInformation: The iPhoneCamera in
         the History of Photography. In Jason Farman (eds), Foundations of Mobile
         Media Studies: Essential Texts on the Formation of a Field. Oxford and New
         York: Routledge.                                    
        Crary, Jonathan (1992) Techniques ofthe Observer: On Vision andModernity in
         the Nineteenth Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
        Daston,LorraineandGalison,Peter(2007)Objectivity.NewYork:ZoneBooks.
        Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (1994) What Is Philosophy?, Tomlinson
         Hugh and Burchell. Graham (trans). New York: Columbia University Press.
        Deleuze, Gilles and Guattari, Felix (2005) A Thousand Plateaus. Minneapolis:
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
        Doganovam, Liliana and Muniesa, Fabian (2015) Capitalization devices:
         Business models and the renewal of markets. In: Kornberger, Martin,

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
        Justesen, Lise, Koed Madsen, Anders and Mouritsen, Jan (eds) Making
        Things Valuable. Oxford: Oxford University Press.    
      Evans,RichardandGao,Jim(2016)DeepMindAIreducesGoogleDataCentre
        coolingbillby40%.DeepMind.Availableat:https://deepmind.com/blog/deep
        mind-ai-reduces-google-data-centre-cooling-bill-40/ (accessed 21 March 2019).
      Flaxman, Gregory (2000) Cinema Year Zero. In: Flaxman, Gregory (ed.) The
        Brain Is the Screen: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Cinema. Minneapolis:
        University of Minnesota Press .                      
      Frosh, Paul (2015) The gestural image: The selfie, photography theory and
        kinesthetic sociability. The International Journal of Communication 9.
        Available at: http://ijoc.org/index.php/ijoc/article/viewFile/3146/1388
        (accessed 21 March 2019).                            
      Gillespie,Tarleton(2010)Thepoliticsofplatforms.NewMedia&Society12(3):
        347–364.                                             
      Gillespie, Tarleton (2017) Algorithmically recognizable: Santorum’s Google
        problem, and Google’s Santorum problem. Information, Communication &
        Society 20(1): 63–80.                                
      Go´mez Cruz, Edgar and Thornham, Helen (2015) Selfies beyond self-represen-
        tation: The (theoretical) f(r)ictions of a practice. Journal of Aesthetics and
        Culture 7. Available at: http://www.aestheticsandculture.net/index.php/jac/
        article/view/28073 (accessed 21 March 2019).         
      Hallinan,BlakeandStriphas,Ted(2014)Recommendedforyou:TheNetflixPrize
        andtheproductionofalgorithmicculture.NewMedia&Society18(1):117–137.
      Halpern,Orit(2015)BeautifulData:AHistoryofVisionandReasonsince1945.
        Durham: Duke University Press.                       
      Heidegger, Martin (1977) The age of the world picture. In: The Question
        Concerning Technology, and Other Essays. London: Harper and Row.
      Hogan, Me´l (2015a) Data flows and water woes: The Utah Data Center. Big
        Data & Society 2(2). Available at: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.
        1177/2053951715592429 (accessed 21 March 2019).      
      Hogan, Me´l (2015b) Facebook data storage centers as the archive’s underbelly.
        Television & New Media 16(1): 3–18.                  
      Jansson, Andreas, Humphrey, Eric, Montecchio, Nicola, et al. (2017) Singing
        voiceseparationwithdeepU-Netconvolutionalnetworks.Paperpresentedat
        the 18th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference,
        23–27 October 2017, Suzhou, China.                   
      Kahn, Philippe (2017) The Creation of the Camera-Phone and Instant-Picture-
        Mail Available at: http://www.philippe.com/2017/06/09/the-creation-of-the-
        camera-phone-and-instant-picture-mail/ (accessed May 15 2019).
      Keating,PeterandCambrosio,Alberto(2003)BiomedicalPlatforms:Realigning
        the Normal and the Pathological in Late-Twentieth-Century Medicine.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                            
      Kember, Sarah (2014) Face recognition and the emergence of smart photog-
        raphy. Journal of Visual Culture 13(2): 182–199.     
      Kitchin, Rob (2017) Thinking critically about and researching algorithms.
        Information, Communication & Society 20(1): 14–29.   
      Levin, Adam (2014) The selfie in the age of digital recursion. InVisible Culture
        20. Available at: http://ivc.lib.rochester.edu/the-selfie-in-the-age-of-digital-
        recursion/ (accessed 21 March 2019).                 

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        MacKenzie and Munster                        21      
                                                             
        McAfee, Andrew and Brynjolfsson, Erik (2017) Machine, Platform, Crowd:
         Harnessing Our Digital Future. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
        Mnih, Volodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Silver, David, et al. (2015) Human-
         level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 518(7540): 529.
        Mordvintsev, Alexander, Olah, Christopher and Tyka, Mike (2015)
         Inceptionism: Going Deeper into Neural Networks. Google AI Blog
         https://ai.googleblog.com/2015/06/inceptionism-going-deeper-into-neural.
         html (accessed May 15 2019).                        
        Najafabadi, M, Villanustre, Flavio, Khoshgoftaar, Taghi, Naeem, M, et al.
         (2015) Deep learning applications and challenges in big data analytics.
         Journal of Big Data 2(1). Available at: https://journalofbigdata.springero-
         pen.com/articles/10.1186/s40537-014-0007-7 (accessed 21 March 2019).
        Newman, Lily Hay (2017) Apple’s machine learning engine could surface your
         iPhone’s secrets. Wired. Available at: https://www.wired.com/story/core-ml-
         privacy-machine-learning-ios/ (accessed 18 January 2018).
        Neyland, Daniel (2016) Bearing account-able witness to the ethical algorithmic
         system. Science, Technology, & Human Values 41(1): 50–76.
        Parisi, Luciana (2013) Contagious Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        Pasquale, Frank (2015) The Black Box: The Secret Algorithms that control
         Money and Information. Havard: Harvard University Press.
        Plantin, Jean-Christophe, Lagoze, Carl, Edwards, Paul N and Sandvig,
         Christian (2018) Infrastructure studies meet platform studies in the age of
         Google and Facebook. New Media & Society 20(1): 293–310.
        Rubinstein, David and Sluis, Katrina (2013) The digital image in photographic
         culture: Algorithmic photography and the crisis of representation. In: Lister,
         Martin (ed.) The Photographic Image in Digital Culture. London: Routledge.
        Sandvig, Christian, Hamilton, Kevin, Karahalios, Karrie and Langbort, Cedric
         (2014) An algorithm audit. In: Pen˜a Gangadharan, Seeta (ed.) Data and
         Discrimination: Collected Essays. Washington, DC: New America.
         Available at: https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/public_comments/
         2014/10/00078-92938.pdf (accessed 17 April 2019).   
        Savov, Vlad (2017) ARM designed an image signal processor, and that’s a big
         deal. The Verge, 2017, https://www.theverge.com/2017/4/27/15449146/arm-
         mali-c71-isp-mobile-photography (accessed 18 May 2019).
        Seaver, Nick (2017) Algorithms as culture: Some tactics for the ethnography
         ofalgorithmicsystems.BigData&Society4(2).Availableat:https://journals.
         sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2053951717738104 (accessed 21 March 2019).
        Shaji, Appu (2016) Understanding aesthetics with deep learning. NVidia
         Developer Blog, Available at: https://devblogs.nvidia.com/parallelforall/
         understanding-aesthetics-deep-learning/ (accessed 21 January 2018).
        Silver,David,Huang,Aja,Maddison,ChrisJ,etal.(2016)Masteringthegame
         ofGowithdeepneuralnetworksandtreesearch.Nature529(7587):484–489.
        Srnicek, Nick (2016) Platform Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Virilio,Paul(1994)TheVisionMachine.Indianapolis:IndianaUniversityPress.
        Yoshida, Junko (2015) How camera phones changed the world. The EE Times.
         Available at: https://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id¼1328183&
         page_number¼5 (accessed 19 January 2018).           

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                            Theory, Culture & Society 36(5)
                                                             
      AdrianMacKenzie isaProfessorof Sociologyat theAustralianNational
      University, Canberra. He is the author of four books, the latest being
      Machine Learners: Archaeology of a Data Practice (MIT Press, 2017).
                                                             
      AnnaMunsterisaProfessorinArtandDesign,UniversityofNewSouth
      Wales, Sydney, Australia. She is the author of two books, including An
      Aesthesia of Networks (MIT Press, 2013).               
                                                             
      Munster and MacKenzie are currently collaborating on the project ‘Re-
      imaging the Empirical: Statistical Visualisation in Art and Science’
      (2017–19), funded by the Australian Research Council’s Discovery
      Program.                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             