[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      332                          Theory, Culture & Society 32(7–8)
                                                             
                                           Theory,Culture&Society
                                              32(7–8)332–336 
      Radical  Feminism                                      
                                            !TheAuthor(s)2015
                                           Reprintsandpermissions:
                                      sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
      Finn Mackay                       DOI:10.1177/0263276415616682
                                               tcs.sagepub.com
      Universityof theWest ofEngland                         
      Abstract                                               
      How has feminism changed in the UK since the 1960s? This was the question I set
      out to explore in my research on the British Women’s Liberation Movement, pub-
      lished as Radical Feminism: Feminist Activism in Movement (2015). I found that the
      motivations and aspirations of activists today were similar to those reported by
      feminists of the Second Wave;but the methods and tactics weremore professiona-
      lized and there was less of a focus on women-only space.
      Keywords                                               
      activism, choice feminism, feminism, Second Wave, Third Wave
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      While still a niche movement, fem- types, methods and motivations
      inism has been enjoying an appar- of activism and activists in the
      entresurgenceacrosstheUKsince movement then, compared to
      the early 2000s. Feminist activism those of the current resurgence. I
      is visible on the streets once again, surveyed and interviewed over one
      and commentary and agendas are hundred feminist activists of all
      progressing in mainstream media different schools or types, from
      in ways that have not been seen socialist feminists to Christian
      for decades. Marches such as anarchists to radical lesbian
      Reclaim the Night attract thou- feminists.             
      sands more than during the The main changes I observed in
      Second Wave of the 1970s and the movement are a shift towards
      1980s when feminism is last con- the inclusion of men in feminist
      sidered to have been at its height organizing and leadership, and an
      across the Western world. increasing professionalization or
        My   new  book, Radical managerialism in the methods of
      Feminism: Feminist Activism in activism. A previous, more do-it-
      Movement (2015), traces the her- yourself attitude, referenced by
      story of the British Women’s feminists of the 1970s, has given
      Liberation Movement from the way to an unquestioned assump-
      Second Wave, and compares the tion amongst younger organizers
      Correspondingauthor:FinnMackay.Email:fm9817@my.bristol.ac.uk
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Section: TCS Website Highlights      333     
                                                             
        that events must be policed and streetlamps.Theserealitiesofspa-
        stewarded, that formal venues tial segregation clashed with the
        must be hired, that media training accounts of older activists, who
        must be sought for spokespeople frequently assumed that younger
        and that illegal activities are women today must feel freer, due
        inappropriate,iftheyareevencon- to them being more visible in the
        sidered an option at all. The night time economy and in urban
        fraught fault lines which exercised public space.    
        the movement of the past, along Younger women were hungry
        the lines of race, class and sexual- for and welcomed collectivity;
        ity, have also shifted, fracturing they were generally positive about
        into divisions over the inclusion dedicated feminist spaces, though
        of trans women in feminism and whether these were open to men
        a persistent though modern separ- in some circumstances was still up
        ation of those for or against the for debate. Reflecting a backdrop
        industries of prostitution and of brutal neoliberalism (Baker,
        pornography.            2008; Duggan, 2003), not to men-
         Sadly, the motivations for par- tion an ongoing backlash against
        ticipation in feminist activism feminism as a social movement
        remain remarkably similar; (Faludi, 1992), women spoke
        women recounted experiences of about victim-blaming and isola-
        sexual harassment, discrimination tion, feeling like they are the ‘only
        at work, isolation in pregnancy feminist in the village’ in their col-
        and child rearing, as well as inci- lege, workplace or amongst their
        dences of rape and other forms of peers. Activists were spending a
        male violence. Echoing work from great deal of their own personal
        urban geography and criminology finances as well as physical and
        (Condon et al., 2007; Thomas and emotional labour on creating fem-
        Bromley, 2000; Stanko, 1990), inist spaces, only to be ridiculed
        younger women voiced concerns andstereotypedbyfriendsandcol-
        over their safety in public space, leagues. This ridicule took all too
        especially at night, and described familiar forms, raising the spectre
        the daily micro practices they of the hairy-legged, extremist,
        engaged with in order to manage man-hating, lesbian feminist
        these concerns. While walking (Scharff, 2010; Hesford, 2005;
        home at night, women carried Rich, 2005). Despite the fact that
        their keys sticking out of their most of my respondents identified
        fists, pretended to be on the as heterosexual, the majority of
        phone to a boyfriend, avoided organizers recounted experiences
        enclosed bridges and underpasses of such anti-feminism in the form
        completely, diverted to longer of homophobia:        
        more well-lit routes, and walked                     
        in the middle of roads rather than There are horrible stereo-
        onthepavementsinordertobathe types, about feminists, you
        inthesecurityofthearcthrownby know; hairy, man-hating

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      334                          Theory, Culture & Society 32(7–8)
                                                             
        lesbians. Yeah, just that sort usingfourcriteria:first,theaccept-
        of thing is really frustrating, ance of the existence of patriarchy
        the associations of feminism. alongside a commitment to end it;
                               second, the use and promotion of
        (Lucy, 24, white, heterosex-                         
                               women-only space as an organiz-
        ual, feminist)                                       
                               ing method; third, a focus on all
                               forms of male violence against
        ...alotofwomenwoulddeny                              
                               womenandtheirroleasakeystone  
        it,andtheywouldn’tsaythere                           
                               of women’s oppression broadly;
        was any need for feminism                            
                               fourth and finally, an extension of
        and they would deny that                             
                               the analysis of male violence 
        theywere‘thatkindoffemin-                            
                               againstwomentoincludetheinsti-
        ist’. And when I say: what’s tutions of pornography and pros-
        ‘that kind of feminist’? I get titution. This list is by no means
        stereotypes. Oh one who exhaustive and is purely my own
        doesn’t like men, and I think, interpretation and understanding
        where do you get this idea? of this school of feminism.
        Show me a feminist who  Radicalfeminismoftenseemsto  
        doesn’t like men or women, serve as the vessel or totem which
                               signifiesafeminismgonetoofar,an
        we love each other; we just                          
                               extremeexampleoffeminismanda  
        dislike what they [men] do as                        
                               destinationatwhichnosaneperson
        agroup.(Samantha,64,white                            
                               would presumably wish to arrive.
        Irish, heterosexual, socialist                       
                               Scholars have commented on how
        feminist)                                            
                               feminist stereotypes generally are
                               brought into being by the sort of
        Women worry if they call                             
                               frequent and universally recog-
        themselves feminist then they                        
                               nized references that were detailed
        mightbeseenasbeinglesbian bymyownresearchparticipants,as
        and not shaving their arm- quoted above.             
        pits, you know. I think the Thestereotypeoftheugly,man-
        battle against feminism has bashing, lesbian feminist comes
        been quite insidious. (Fallon, into existence through repeated
        32, white, heterosexual, rad- reiterations and produces that
        ical feminist)         which it seeks to designate every
                               time it is named (Scharff, 2010:
        My contention is that this type 839). So common are these femin-
      of misogynist and homophobic ist stereotypes, they almost go
      anti-feminism attachesparticularly unquestioned, including by femin-
      to one school of feminism, and ist academics: ‘[feminism] is a sig-
      that is radical feminism. While nifier of something very particular
      there is no one definition of femin- and comes with additional mean-
      ism generally, let alone the schools ings attached, which many seek
      or types within it, I have previ- to avoid... It has acquired conno-
      ously defined radical feminism tations of separatism, extremism,

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Section: TCS Website Highlights      335     
                                                             
        men-avoiding lesbianism’ (Walby, injustice in the lives of young
        2011: 3).                 women: Findings from a study in
         It is not enough to theorize how North Queensland, Australia.
        such stereotypes are brought into Women’s Studies International
                                  Forum 31: 53–64.           
        being through repetition, because                    
                                Condon S, Leiber M and Maillochon
        to do so misses a very important                     
                                  F (2007) Feeling unsafe in public
        point, which is that some of the                     
                                  places: Understanding women’s
        labels used to denigrate feminism                    
                                  fears. Revue francaise de sociologie
        and feminists are not myth but                       
                                  48: 101–128.               
        reality. Some feminists are les-                     
                                Duggan L (2003) The Twilight of
        bians, some are separatists, some Equality? Boston: Beacon.
        choose not to remove their body Faludi S (1992) Backlash. London:
        hair, and these political choices Chatto & Windus.   
        are valid and have a proud and Hesford V (2005) Feminism and its
        powerful history. It does seem the ghosts: The spectre of the femin-
        case that such examples are, how- ist-as-lesbian. Feminist Theory
        ever,rareinthecurrentmovement, 6(3): 227–250.        
        despitereferencetothemironically RichE(2005)Youngwomen,feminist
                                  identities and neo-liberalism.
        being so omnipresent.                                
                                  Women’s Studies International
         Toacceptorfailtocommenton                           
                                  Forum 28: 495–508.         
        feminist stereotyping leaves intact                  
                                Scharff CM (2010) Young women’s
        the notion that there is something                   
                                  negotiations of heterosexual con-
        wrong with identifying as a les-                     
                                  ventions: Theorizing sexuality in
        bian, lesbian feminist, separatist                   
                                  constructions of ‘the feminist’.
        feminist or radical feminist. Every Sociology 44(5): 827–842.
        time this happens, the feminist Stanko E (1990) Everyday Violence:
        choices, activist choices and argu- How Women and Men Experience
        ably the sexual choices of a new Sexual and Physical Danger.
        generation of feminists are limited London: Pandora. 
        and policed. Ironically, of course, Thomas CJ and Bromley RD (2000)
        thisisthepreciseaimof thosevery City-centre revitalisation: Problems
        stereotypes, to discourage women of fragmentation and fear in the
                                  evening and night-time city. Urban
        from a feminist identification, per-                 
                                  Studies37(8):1403–1429.    
        haps particularly aradical feminist                  
                                Walby S (2011) The Future of 
        identification. As activists, we                     
                                  Feminism. Cambridge: PolityPress.
        must not aid the backlash in this                    
        quest, but instead must reclaim                      
        such so-called stereotypes as ster-                  
                                Finn Mackay is Senior Lecturer in
        ling and real examples of feminism                   
                                Sociology at the University of the
        at its finest.                                       
                                West  of  England. Radical   
                                Feminism: Feminist Activism in
                                Movement was published by    
        References              Palgrave Macmillan in early 2015.
        BakerJ(2008)Theideologyofchoice. [https://finnmackay.wordpress.com/]
         Overstating progress and hiding                     

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      336                          Theory, Culture & Society 32(7–8)
                                                             
      This article is part of a Theory, originally published on 4 March
      Culture & Society special section, 2015 at: http://theoryculturesocie-
      TCS  Website Highlights (TCS ty.org/finn-mackay-on-radical-
      32(7–8), December 2015). It was feminism/              
                                                             
                                                             
                                           Theory,Culture&Society
                                              32(7–8)336–339 
      Remembering                                            
                                            !TheAuthor(s)2015
                                           Reprintsandpermissions:
      Ulrich  Beck                                           
                                      sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                        DOI:10.1177/0263276415617006
                                               tcs.sagepub.com
      Scott Lash                                             
      Goldsmiths, Universityof London                        
      Abstract                                               
      This is a commemoration of Ulrich Beck, written originally just after his passing. It
      understands Beck in terms of Kant’s critiques. Here if, say, Latour incorporates the
      first critique of instrumentalism andHabermas the secondcritique of morality, then
      Ulrich points us to the third critique – hope.         
      Keywords                                               
      Beck, hope, reflexivity                                
                                                             
                                                             
      I first encountered Ulrich Beck as in German intellectual life. But
      a  (superannuated) post-doc. I in 1987 this kind of stuff was
      was a Humboldt Stipendiat in beyond the pale. Habermas and
      Berlin, in 1987, and heard Enlightenment modernism ruled.
      Helmut Berking give a paper on Anditshouldhaveruled.Itislargely
      ‘RefexiveModernisierung’ataFreie down to Habermas that Germany
      Universita¨t-driven colloquium. I now is a land based less on Blut-
      had already published a paper und-Boden than rooted in Verfas-
      called ‘Postmodernity and Desire’ sungspatriotismus. Beck’s founda-
      in the journal Theory and Society, tional Risikogesellschaft, however,
      and Beck’s reflexive modernization featured not the order of
      seemed to be an opening beyond Habermas’s ‘ideal speech situa-
      the modern/postmodern impasse. tion’ but was based on contingency
      In 2014 there is Foucault and now and unintended consequences. But
      Deleuze andeven‘Lebenssoziologie’ Beckian contingency was rooted in
      Correspondingauthor:ScottLash.Email:scottlash1@gmail.com
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             