[PAGE 1]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 159
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
              Epistemic     Disobedience,                               
                                                                        
                                                                        
              Independent       Thought    and                          
                                                                        
              Decolonial     Freedom                                    
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
              Walter D. Mignolo                                         
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                  Abstract                                              
                  Once upon a time scholars assumed that the knowing subject in the disci-
                  plines is transparent, disincorporated from the known and untouched by the
                  geo-political configuration of the world in which people are racially ranked
                  and regions are racially configured. From a detached and neutral point of
                  observation (that Colombian philosopher Santiago Castro-Gómez describes
                  as the hubris of the zero point), the knowing subject maps the world and
                  its problems, classifies people and projects into what is good for them. Today
                  that assumption is no longer tenable, although there are still many believers.
                  At stake is indeed the question of racism and epistemology. And once upon
                  a time scholars assumed that if you ‘come’ from Latin America you have to
                  ‘talk about’ Latin America; that in such a case you have to be a token of
                  your culture. Such expectation will not arise if the author ‘comes’ from
                  Germany, France, England or the US. As we know: the first world has knowl-
                  edge, the third world has culture; Native Americans have wisdom, Anglo
                  Americans have science. The need for political and epistemic de-linking here
                  comes to the fore, as well as decolonializing and decolonial knowledges,
                  necessary steps for imagining and building democratic, just, and non-
                  imperial/colonial societies.                          
                  Key words                                             
                  decolonial option/thinking ■decolonizing methodology ■epistemic/linguistic
                  racism ■geo- and body-politics of knowledge ■zero point epistemology
                                                                        
                                                                        
              ■Theory, Culture & Society2009 (SAGE, Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, and Singapore),
                Vol. 26(7–8): 159–181                                   
                DOI: 10.1177/0263276409349275                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 2]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 160
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             160 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             I                                                          
            O                                                           
                 NCE UPON a time scholars assumed that the knowing subject in
                 the disciplines is transparent, disincorporated from the known and
                 untouched by the geo-political configuration of the world in which
             people are racially ranked and regions are racially configured. From a
             detached and neutral point of observation (that Colombian philosopher
             Santiago Castro-Gómez (2007) describes as the hubris of the zero point), the
             knowing subject maps the world and its problems, classifies people and
             projects into what is good for them. Today that assumption is no longer
             tenable, although there are still many believers. At stake is indeed the
             question of racism and epistemology (Chukwudi Eze, 1997; Mignolo, forth-
             coming). And once upon a time scholars assumed that if you ‘come’ from
             Latin America you have to ‘talk about’ Latin America; that in such a case
             you have to be a token of your culture. Such expectation will not arise if the
             author ‘comes’ from Germany, France, England or the US. In such cases it
             is not assumed that you have to be talking about your culture but can
             function as a theoretically minded person. As we know: the first world has
             knowledge, the third world has culture; Native Americans have wisdom,
             Anglo Americans have science. The need for political and epistemic de-
             linking here comes to the fore, as well as decolonializing and decolonial
             knowledges, necessary steps for imagining and building democratic, just,
             and non-imperial/colonial societies.                       
                Geo-politics of knowledge goes hand in hand with geo-politics of
             knowing. Who and when, why and where is knowledge generated (rather
             than produced, like cars or cell phones)? Asking these questions means to
             shift the attention from the enunciated to the enunciation. And by so doing,
             turning Descartes’s dictum inside out: rather than assuming that thinking
             comes before being, one assumes instead that it is a racially marked body
             in a geo-historical marked space that feels the urge or get the call to speak,
             to articulate, in whatever semiotic system, the urge that makes of living
             organisms ‘human’ beings.                                  
                By setting the scenario in terms of geo- and body-politics I am starting
             and departing from already familiar notions of ‘situated knowledges’. Sure,
             all knowledges are situated and every knowledge is constructed. But that is
             just the beginning. The question is: who, when, why is constructing
             knowledges (Mignolo, 1999, 2005 [1995])? Why did eurocentered episte-
             mology conceal its own geo-historical and bio-graphical locations and
             succeed in creating the idea of universal knowledge as if the knowing
             subjects were also universal? This illusion is pervasive today in the social
             sciences, the humanities, the natural sciences and the professional schools.
             Epistemic disobedience means to delink from the illusion of the zero point
             epistemology.                                              
                The shift I am indicating is the anchor (constructed of course, located
             of course, not just anchored by nature or by God) of the argument that
             follows. It is the beginning of any epistemic decolonial de-linking with all
             its historical, political and ethical consequences. Why? Because geo-
                                                                        

[PAGE 3]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 161
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 161 
                                                                        
              historical and bio-graphic loci of enunciation have been located by and
              through the making and transformation of the colonial matrix of power: a
              racial system of social classification that invented Occidentalism (e.g. Indias
              Occidentales), that created the conditions for Orientalism; distinguished the
              South of Europe from its center (Hegel) and, on that long history, remapped
              the world as first, second and third during the Cold War. Places of non-
              thought (of myth, non-western religions, folklore, underdevelopment involv-
              ing regions and people) today have been waking up from the long process
              of westernization. The anthropos inhabiting non-European places discov-
              ered that s/he had been invented, as anthropos, by a locus of enunciations
              self-defined as humanitas.                                
                  Now, there are currently two kinds or directionsadvanced by the former
              anthropos who are no longer claiming recognition by or inclusion in the
              humanitas, but engaging in epistemic disobedience and de-linking from the
              magic of the Western idea of modernity, ideals of humanity and promises of
              economic growth and financial prosperity (Wall Street dixit). One direction
              unfolds within the globalization of a type of economy that in both liberal
              and Marxist vocabulary is defined as ‘capitalism’. One of the strongest advo-
              cates of this is the Singaporean scholar, intellectual and politician Kishore
              Mahbubani, to which I will return later. One of his earlier book titles carries
              the unmistakable and irreverent message: Can Asians Think?: Understand-
              ing the Divide between East and West (2001). Following Mahbubani’s own
              terminology, this direction could be identified as de-westernization. De-
              westernization means, within a capitalist economy, that the rules of the game
              and the shots are no longer called by Western players and institutions. The
              seventh Doha round is a signal example of de-westernizing options.
                  The second direction is being advanced by what I describe as the
              decolonial option. The decolonial option is the singular connector of a
              diversity of decolonials. The decolonial paths have one thing in common:
              the colonial wound, the fact that regions and people around the world have
              been classified as underdeveloped economically and mentally. Racism not
              only affects people but also regions or, better yet, the conjunction of natural
              resources needed by humanitas in places inhabited by anthropos. De -
              colonial options have one aspect in common with de-westernizing argu-
              ments: the definitive rejection of ‘being told’ from the epistemic privileges
              of the zero point what ‘we’ are, what our ranking is in relation to the ideal
              of humanitas and what we have to do to be recognized as such. However,
              decolonial and de-westernizing options diverge in one crucial and in -
              disputable point: while the latter do not question the ‘civilization of death’
              hidden under the rhetoric of modernization and prosperity, of the improve-
              ment of modern institutions (e.g. liberal democracy and an economy
              propelled by the principle of growth and prosperity), decolonial options
              start from the principle that the regeneration of life shall prevail over
              primacy of the production and reproduction of goods at the cost of life (life
              in general and of humanitas and anthropos alike!). I illustrate this direc-
              tion, below, commenting on Partha Chatterjee’s re-orienting ‘eurocentered
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 4]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 162
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             162 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             modernity’ toward the future in which ‘our modernity’ (in India, in Central
             Asia and the Caucasus, in South America, briefly, in all regions of the world
             upon which eurocentered modernity was either imposed or ‘adopted’ by local
             actors assimilating to local histories inventing and enacting global designs)
             becomes the statement of interconnected dispersal in which decolonial
             futures are being played out.                              
                Last but not least, my argument doesn’t claim originality (‘originality’
             is one of the basic expectations of modern control of subjectivity) but aims
             to make a contribution to growing processes of decoloniality around the
             world. My humble claim is that geo- and body-politics of knowledge has
             been hidden from the self-serving interests of Western epistemology and that
             a task of decolonial thinking is the unveiling of epistemic silences of
             Western epistemology and affirming the epistemic rights of the racially
             devalued, and decolonial options to allow the silences to build arguments
             to confront those who take ‘originality’ as the ultimate criterion for the final
             judgment.1                                                 
             II                                                         
             The introduction of geo-historical and bio-graphical configurations in
             processes of knowing and understanding allows for a radical re-framing (e.g.
             decolonization) of the original formal apparatus of enunciation.2 I have
             supported in the past those who maintain that it is not enough to change the
             content of the conversation, that it is of the essence to change the terms of
             the conversation. Changing the terms of the conversation implies going
             beyond disciplinary or interdisciplinary controversies and the conflict of
             interpretations. As far as controversies and interpretations remain within
             the same rules of the game (terms of the conversation), the control of knowl-
             edge is not called into question. And in order to call into question the
             modern/colonial foundation of the control of knowledge, it is necessary to
             focus on the knower rather than on the known. It means to go to the very
             assumptions that sustain locus enunciations.               
                In what follows I revisit the formal apparatus of enunciation from the
             perspective of geo- and bio-graphic politics of knowledge. My revisiting is
             epistemic rather than linguistic, although focusing on the enunciation is
             unavoidable if we aim at changing the terms and not only the content of the
             conversation. The basic assumption is that the knower is always implicated,
             geo- and body-politically, in the known, although modern epistemology (e.g.
             the hubris of the zero point) managed to conceal both and created the figure
             of the detached observer, a neutral seeker of truth and objectivity who at
             the same time controls the disciplinary rules and puts himself or herself in
             a privileged position to evaluate and dictate.             
                The argument is structured as follows. Sections I and II lay out the
             ground for the politics of knowledge geo-historically and bio-graphically,
             contesting the hegemony of zero point epistemology. In Section III, I explore
             three cases in which geo- and body-politics of knowledge comes forcefully
             to the fore: one from Africa, one from India and the third from New Zealand.
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 5]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 163
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 163 
                                                                        
              These three cases are complemented by a fourth from Latin America: my
              argument is here. It is not the report of a detached observer but the interven-
              tion of a decolonial project that ‘comes’ from South America, the Caribbean
              and Latinidad in the US. Understanding the argument implies that the
              reader will shift his or her geography of reasoning and of evaluating argu-
              ments. In Section IV, I come back to geo- and body-politics of knowledge
              and their epistemic, ethical and political consequences. In Section V, I
              attempt to pull the strings together and weave my argument with the three
              cases explored, hoping that what I say will not be taken as the report of a
              detached observer but as the intervention of a decolonial thinker.
                  In semiotics, a basic distinction has been made (Emile Benveniste)
              between the enunciation and the enunciated. The distinction was necessary,
              for Benveniste, to ground the floating sign central to Ferdinand de Saussure’s
              semiology and its development in French structuralism. Benveniste turned
              to the enunciation and, by doing so, to the subject producing and manipu-
              lating signs, rather than the structure of the sign itself (the enunciated). With
              this distinction in mind, I would venture to say that the interrelated spheres
              of the colonial matrix of power (economy, authority, gender and sexuality,
              and knowledge/subjectivity) operate at the level of the enunciated while
              patriarchy and racism are grounded in the enunciation. Let’s explore it in
              more detail (Benveniste, 1970; Todorov, 1970).            
                  Benveniste laid out the ‘formal apparatus of enunciation’ that he
              described on the bases of the pronominal system of any language (although
              his examples were mainly European languages), plus the temporal and
              spatial deitics or markers. The pronominal system is activated in each
              verbal (that is, oral or written) enunciation. The enunciator is of necessity
              located in the first person pronoun (I). If the enunciator says ‘we’, the first
              person pronoun is presupposed in such a way that ‘we’ could refer to either
              the enunciator and the person or persons being addressed, or by ‘we’ the
              enunciator could mean he or she and someone else, not including
              theaddressee. The remaining pronouns are activated around the I/we of the
              enunciation.                                              
                  The same happens with temporal and spatial markers. The enuncia-
              tor can only enunciate in the present. The past and the future are meaning-
              ful only in relation to the present of the enunciation. And the enunciator
              can only enunciate ‘here’, that is, wherever she is located at the moment of
              enunciation. Thus, ‘there’, ‘behind’, ‘next to’, ‘left and right’ etc., are
              meaningful only in reference to the enunciator’s ‘here’.  
                  Now let’s take a second step. The extension of linguistic theory and
              analysis from the sentence to discourse prompted the introduction of
              ‘discursive frame’ or ‘conversation frame’. Indeed, engaging in conversation,
              letter writing, meetings of various kinds, etc., requires more than the formal
              apparatus of enunciation: it requires a frame, that is, a context familiar to
              all participants, be it in business meetings, casual conversations, internet
              messages, etc. While in everyday life frames are not regulated but rather
              operate through consensual agreements, disciplinary knowledge requires
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 6]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 164
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             164 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             more complex and regulated frames known today as ‘scholarly disciplines’.
             In the European Renaissance, the disciplines were classified into the
             ‘trivium’ and the ‘cuadrivium’, while Christian theology was the ceiling
             under which both the trivium and the cuadrivium were housed. ‘Beyond’
             that ceiling was the world of pagans, gentiles and Saracens.
                In 18th-century Europe, the movement toward secularization brought
             with it a radical transformation of the frame of mind and the organization of
             knowledge, the disciplines and the institutions (e.g. the university). The
             Kantian-Humboldtian model3 displaced the goals and the format of the
             Renaissance university and instead promoted the secularization of the
             university founded on secular science (from Galileo to Newton) and on
             secular philosophy, and both declared war against Christian theology (Kant,
             1991 [1798]). During the first quarter of the 19th century, the reorganiza-
             tion of knowledge and the formation of new disciplines (biology, economy,
             psychology) left ‘behind’ the trivium and the cuadrivium and marched
             toward the new organization between human sciences (social sciences and
             the humanities) and natural sciences.4 Wilhelm Dilthey (1991) came up
             with his ground-breaking epistemic distinction between ideographic and
             nomothetic sciences, the first concerned with meaning and interpretations,
             the second with laws and explanations.5These are still distinctions that hold
             true today, even if there have been, at the surface, disciplines that have
             crossed lines in one or other direction and pushed toward interdisciplinar-
             ity that more often than not is based on these distinctions, although not
             addressing them.                                           
                So then we have moved from the formal apparatus of enunciation to
             frames of conversations, to disciplines and to something that is above the
             discipline, a super-frame that I would name ‘cosmology’. The history of
             knowledge-making in modern Western history from the Renaissance on will
             have, then, theology and philosophy-science as the two cosmological frames,
             competing with each other at one level, but collaborating with each other
             when the matter is to disqualify forms of knowledge beyond these two frames.
                Both frames are institutionally and linguistically anchored in Western
             Europe. They are anchored in institutions, chiefly the history of European
             universities and in the six modern (e.g. vernacular) European and imperial
             languages: Italian, Spanish and Portuguese, dominant from the Renaissance
             to the Enlightenment, and German, French and English, dominant from the
             Enlightenment onward. Behind the six modern European languages of
             knowledge lay its foundation: Greek and Latin – not Arabic or Mandarin,
             Hindi or Urdu, Aymara or Nahuatl. The six mentioned languages based on
             Greek and Latin provided the ‘tool’ to create a given conception of knowl-
             edge that was then extended to the increasing, through time, European
             colonies from the Americas to Asia and Africa. In the Americas, notably,
             we encounter something that is alien to Asian and African regions: the
             colonial European university, such as the University of Santo Domingo
             (1538), the University of Mexico (1551), the University of San Marcos, Lima
             (1551) and Harvard University (1636).                      
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 7]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 165
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 165 
                                                                        
                  The linguistic, institutional foundation, management and practices
              that knowledge-making brings allow me to extend Benveniste’s formal appa-
              ratus of enunciation and to elaborate on enunciation and knowledge-making
              focusing on the borders between the Western (in the precise linguistic and
              institutional sense I defined above) foundation of knowledge and under-
              standing (epistemology and hermeneutics) and its confrontation with knowl-
              edge-making in non-European languages and institutions in China,6 in the
              Islamic Caliphate, or education in the institutions of the Maya, Aztecs and
              Incas that the Encyclopaedia Britannicahas deigned to describe as ‘educa-
              tion in primitive and early civilizations’.7              
                  Perhaps Frantz Fanon conceptualized better than anyone else what I
              have in mind for extending Benveniste’s formal apparatus of enunciation.
              In Black Skin, White Masks (1967 [1952]) Fanon made an epistemic foun-
              dational statement about language that no one in the heated atmosphere of
              structuralism and post-structuralism picked up in the 1960s. And it was
              still ignored by the most semantic and philological orientation of Emile
              Benveniste’s approaches to language. This is what Fanon (pp. 17–18) said:
                  To speak means to be in a position to use a certain syntax, to grasp the
                  morphology of this or that language, but it means above all to assume a
                  culture, to support the weight of a civilization ... The problem that we
                  confront in this chapter is this: The Negro of the Antilles will be proportion-
                  ally whiter – that is, he will come closer to being a real human being – in
                  direct ratio to his mastery of the French language.8  
              Fanon’s dictum applies to the disciplines but also to the sphere of knowl-
              edge in general: the Negro of the Antilles, the Indian from India and from
              the Americas or New Zealand and Australia, the Negro from sub-Saharan
              Africa, the Muslim from the Middle East or Indonesia, etc., ‘will come
              closer to being a real human being in direct ratio to his or her mastery of
              disciplinary norms’. Obviously, Fanon’s point is not to be recognized or
              accepted in the club of ‘real human beings’ defined on the basis of white
              knowledge and white history, but to take away the imperial/colonial idea
              of what it means to be human. This is a case, precisely, in which the
              assault to the imperiality of modern/colonial loci of enunciations (disci-
              plines and institutions) is called into question. A case in point was the
              question asked by many philosophers in Africa and South America during
              the Cold War, and is being asked today by Latino and Latina philosophers
              in the United States.                                     
                  To address this problem I introduced, a while ago (Mignolo, 2002), the
              concepts of geo-politics, body-politics of knowledge and the colonial
              epistemic difference. These concepts will take us to issues announced in the
              title: epistemic disobedience and the decolonial option in epistemology and
              politics.                                                 
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 8]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 166
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             166 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             III                                                        
             If to speak a language means to carry the weight of a civilization, then to
             engage in disciplinary knowledge-making means to master the language of
             the discipline in two senses. You can of course do sociology in Spanish,
             Portuguese, Arabic, Mandarin, Bengali, Akan, etc. But doing it in those
             languages will put you at a disadvantage in relation to mainstream discipli-
             nary debates. It will be a sort of ‘local sociology’. Granted, doing sociology
             in French, German or English will also be ‘local sociology’. The difference
             is that you have a better chance of being read by scholars in any of the
             above mentioned languages, but the inverse will not hold. You will have to
             get your work translated into French, German or English. That today would
             be considered Western sociology, located in the heart of Europe and the
             United States. There are many variations and the issues have been
             addressed many times. I provide three examples.            
                The first is by two African scholars and philosophers, Paulin J.
             Hountondji and Kwasi Wiredu. Paulin J. Hountondji addressed head on
             a question that has been prominent among Third World intellectuals (from
             1950 to 1990) all over the world. However, since it did not receive much
             attention in mainstream intellectual debates and among publishing
             houses, it remained a pervasive issue literally in the margins. From 1960
             onward, mainstream intellectual debates and scholarship in the humani-
             ties focused on structuralism and post-structuralism in its various forms
             (psychoanalysis, deconstruction, archeology of knowledge, communicative
             action). The social sciences, on the other hand, were enjoying their
             promotion after the Second World War and gained a status in the domain
             of scholarship (in England, Germany and France) that they did not have
             before the war.                                            
                The promotion of the social sciences’ status was part of a changing
             leadership in the world order, with the United States taking over the role
             that Europe (England, France and Germany) had enjoyed until then. Geo-
             politically and geo-economically, the Three World division was parallel to
             geo-epistemology or the distribution of scientific labor, as Carl Pletsch
             mapped ‘the three worlds and the division of scientific labor’ in the early
             1980s (Pletsch, 1981; Agnew, 2007). Yet Pletsch’s landmark article was still
             centrifugal: it mapped what First World scholars thought of the new world
             order. First World scholars have the privilege of being both in the enunci-
             ated (one of the three worlds) and the enunciator (the First World). As a
             consequence, what scholars in the Second and Third World thought of them-
             selves and how they were responding was not taken into account. They were
             classified but had no say in the classification other than to react or respond.
             And the time has come.                                     
                Geo-politics of knowledge and of knowing was one of the responses
             from the Third World to the First World. What geo-politics of knowledge
             unveiled is the epistemic privilege of the First World. In the three worlds of
             distribution of scientific labor, the First World had indeed the privilege of
             inventing the classification and being part of it. As a consequence, the
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 9]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 167
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 167 
                                                                        
              impression that knowledge-making has no geo-political location and that its
              location is in an ethereal place that Colombian philosopher Santiago Castro-
              Gómez (2007) has described as ‘the hubris of the zero point’ has been
              successfully naturalized. Thus states Hountondji:         
                  ... it seems urgent to me that the scientists in Africa, and perhaps more
                  generally in the Third World, question themselves on the meaning of their
                  practices as scientists, its real function in the economy of the entirety of
                  scholarship, its place in the process of production of knowledge on a world-
                  wide basis. (1992 [1983]: 238)                        
              Hountondji touches upon several dimensions of ‘scientific and scholarly
              dependency’ of African and other Third World countries. While recogniz-
              ing the ‘improvements’ in material conditions in some countries, such as
              laboratories, libraries, buildings, etc., he strongly argues that Third World
              countries are, economically, providing natural resources to industrial
              countries and, scientifically, providing data to be processed in the labora-
              tories (literal laboratories in the natural sciences, metaphorical laboratories
              in the social sciences) of the First World. The bottom line for Hountondji is
              that in spite of the ‘material progress’ mentioned above, in Third World
              countries ‘scientific designs’ are not created by Africans but by Western
              Europeans or US Americans. Consequently, ‘scientific designs’ do not
              respond to African needs and visions but to needs and visions of Western
              Europeans (mainly those from England, France and Germany, but also
              second order developed countries like Sweden, Belgium and Holland).
              African scholars, furthermore, also depend on the professional magazines
              and publications created, printed and distributed in the First World. The
              situation is not new; it is engrained in the very structure of modernity/colo-
              niality that Hountondji renders in the language of ‘trade and colonization’:
                  Thus, it was natural that the annexation of the Third World, its integration in
                  the worldwide capitalist system through trade and colonization, also comprise
                  a ‘scientific’ window, that the draining of material riches goes hand in hand
                  with intellectual and scientific exploitation, the extortion of secrets and other
                  useful information, as it was natural, on a different level, that they go hand
                  in hand with the extortion of works of art meant to fill the museums of
                  metropolitan areas. (1992 [1983]: 242)                
              A counterargument could be that, although it may have been true during
              the Cold War, with the global reach of ‘globalization’ since the fall of the
              Soviet Union the splendid borderless world that has appeared is in the
              process of erasing such differences. And in fact, Harvard International
              Review dedicated an issue to ‘Global Health’ which maintained:
                  Ideally, training will be linked to the development of research institutions
                  in developing countries by pairing them with institutions in the developed
                  world.Theseactivitiesmustbeadequatelyfundedandresearchersfromthe
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 10]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 168
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             168 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
                West must be given time and credit to participate in institution-building. A
                number of first-rate training and research institutions in the developing
                world, including the International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research in
                Dhaka, Bangladesh, have come about through years of collaboration. (Cash,
                2005)                                                   
             Kwasi Wiredu made a similar call, in his ‘Formulating Modern Thought in
             African Languages: Some Theoretical Considerations’. His call has been
             lost, forgotten or ignored by the growing noise of technology, money, labs
             and ‘global designs in the developed word for the underdeveloped world’,
             as the article by Cash on global health suggests. Wiredu’s call has little
             chance of making the ‘front page’ when, for example, Harvard University
             publications will profile ‘experts’ on developing the South. In the same
             article just mentioned, we find the following prognosis:   
                What, then, should be the strategic approaches to promoting health research
                capacity in developing countries? There are many strategies and goals to be
                pursued, none of which are sufficient alone. The global health research
                agenda must be developed by scientists from both the North and the South.
                Too often, the research agenda of developing countries is set by others outside
                the country. The golden rule of development – ‘He who has the gold makes
                the rules’ – usually applies. This is particularly true of health services
                research wherein local scientists may wish to address questions that seem
                unimportant to outside donors. These scientists may want to conduct a study
                similar to one already done elsewhere, a study that is nonetheless essential
                because it will convince their own medical establishment of the importance
                of the work. Many countries carried out studies on ORT that added little to
                the international literature but helped to convince their own pediatricians of
                the importance of this intervention to treat diarrhea.9 
             The call made by Wiredu (1992) was the following:          
                Conceptually speaking, then, the maxim of the moment should be: ‘African,
                know thyself’.                                          
                                                                        
             If you do not have the time to read Wiredu’s argument in its entirety, please
             do not jump to unwarranted conclusions and think that Wiredu is propos-
             ing to do science in Akan or Luo. Maintain your postmodern smile and your
             sense that traditionalist, essentialist and out-of-fashion and out-of-time
             African philosophers are dreaming and wanting a world forever gone. Let’s
             pause and pay attention to what Wiredu is saying: it is not a return to
             anything, in the same way that Evo Morales is not proposing a ‘return to the
             Ayllu’ before the Spanish arrived and brought with them the seeds of moder-
             nity that two centuries earlier England and France, and later on the United
             States, harvested.                                         
                You see, China and India, today, are not ‘going back in time’. Neither
             are they waiting for orders from the IMF or the White House or the European
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 11]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 169
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 169 
                                                                        
              Union to know what they have to do to be ‘properly modern’ so as not to fail
              or miss the train of ‘modernity’. Much has been written and said after the
              Wall Street financial crisis that the US ‘model’ has collapsed and that history
              is globally moving toward a polycentric world. Wiredu was calling for an
              ‘epistemic awakening’ of Africans and Third World scholars and intellectu-
              als that had already been happening and continues to grow around the world.
                  These considerations take me to the second example, this time from
              an Indian political theorist, Partha Chatterjee. In a landmark article where
              geo- and body-politics of knowledge come clearly to the fore, Chatterjee
              brings into being – indirectly – the missing chapter in Pletsch’s work.
              Furthermore, he offers his own view of the problem from the history of India,
              parallel to the experience of Wiredu and Houtondji. Partha Chatterjee
              addresses the problem of ‘modernity in two languages’. The article, collected
              in his book A Possible India (1998), is the English version of a lecture he
              delivered in Bengali in Calcutta. The English version is not just a transla-
              tion but a theoretical reflection on geo-politics of knowledge and epistemic
              and political de-linking.                                 
                  Unapologetically and forcefully, Chatterjee structured his talk on the
              distinction between ‘our modernity’ and ‘their modernity’. Rather than a
              single modernity defended by post-modern intellectuals in the First World
              (in Pletsch’s distinction), or the most dependent take on ‘peripheral’, ‘sub -
              altern’, ‘marginal’, etc., modernities, Chatterjee plants a solid pillar to build
              the future of ‘our’ modernity – not independent from ‘their modernity’
              (because Western expansion is a fact), but unrepentantly, unashamedly,
              impenitently ‘ours’.                                      
                  This is one of the strengths of Chatterjee’s argument. But remember,
              first, that the British entered into India, commercially, toward the end of the
              18th century and, politically, during the first half of the 19th century when
              England and France, after Napoleon, extended their tentacles into Asia
              and Africa. So for Chatterjee, in contradistinction with South American
              and Caribbean intellectuals, ‘modernity’ means Enlightenment and not
              Renaissance. Not surprisingly Chatterjee takes Immanuel Kant’s ‘What Is
              Enlightenment?’ as a pillar of modernity. Enlightenment meant – for Kant
              – that Man (in the sense of human being) was coming of age, abandoning
              his immaturity, reaching his freedom. Chatterjee points out Kant’s silence
              (intentionally or not) and Michel Foucault’s short-sightedness when reading
              Kant’s essays. Missing in Kant’s celebration of freedom and maturity and in
              Foucault’s celebration was the fact that Kant’s concept of Man and humanity
              was based on the European concept of Man from the Renaissance to the
              Enlightenment and not on the ‘lesser humans’ that populated the world
              beyond the heart of Europe. So, ‘enlightenment’ was not for everybody. Thus,
              if you do not embody Kant’s and Foucault’s local history, memory, language
              and ‘embodied’ experience, what shall you do? Buy a pair of Kant’s and
              Foucault’s shoes?                                         
                  One point in Chatterjee’s insightful interpretation of Kant–Foucault is
              relevant for the argument I am developing here. Paraphrasing Kant,
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 12]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 170
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             170 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             Chatterjee points out that in the ‘universal domain of the pursuit of knowl-
             edge’ that Kant locates in the ‘public’ (not the ‘private’) sphere, where
             ‘freedom of thought’ has its function, he (Kant) is presupposing and claiming
             ‘the right of free speech’ advocated only for those who have the requisite
             qualifications for engaging in the exercise of reason and the pursuit of
             knowledge, and those who can use that freedom in a responsible manner’
             (Mignolo, forthcoming). Chatterjee notices that Foucault did not raise this
             issue, although he could have, given the interest of his own research. I would
             surmise, following Chatterjee’s argument, that what Foucault did not have
             was the colonial experience and political interest propelled by the colonial
             wound that allowed Chatterjee to ‘feel’ and ‘see’ beyond both Kant and
             Foucault. Thus, Chatterjee concludes this argument by stating that vis-à-
             vis both Kant and Foucault:                                
                It is the specialists, a phenomenon which appears alongside the general social
                acceptance of the principle of unrestricted entry into education and learning
                ... In other words, just as we have meant by enlightenment an unrestricted
                and universal field for the exercise of reason, so have we built up an intri-
                cately differentiated structure of authorities which specifies who has the right
                to say what on which subjects. (1998: 273–4)            
             Chatterjee acknowledges, like Hountondji and Wiredu in Africa (although
             independent of each other, since ‘influence’ goes from Europe to the US to
             Africa and India, but not yet in conversations between Africa and India),
             that the Third World (in Pletsch’s terms) has been mainly the ‘consumer’ of
             First World scholarship; and, like his African colleagues, Chatterjee bases
             his argument ‘in the way the history of our modernity has been intertwined
             with the history of colonialism. For that reason, “we” have never quite been
             able to believe that there exists a universal domain of free discourse, unfet-
             tered by differences of race or nationality.’ Chatterjee closes his argument:
                Somehow, from the very beginning, we had made a shrewd guess that given
                the close complicity between modern knowledge and modern regimes of
                power, we would for ever remain consumers of universal modernity; never
                would we be taken as serious producers. It is for this reason that we have
                tried, for over a hundred years, to take our eyes away from this chimera of
                universal modernity and clear up a space where we might become the creators
                of our own modernity. (1998: 275)                       
             I imagine you are getting the point. The argument is similar to arguments
             advanced by Guaman Poma de Ayala and Ottobah Cugoano, in the early 17th
             century and in the second half of the 18th century, when they took Christi-
             anity into their own hands. Instead of submitting with the humility of the
             humiliated, they appropriated Christianity to slap in the face of European
             Christians the arguments of an Indian of Tawantinsuyu and an ex-enslaved
             African in the Caribbean who reached London and unveiled the in-humanity
             of European ideals, visions and self-fulfilling prophecies (Mignolo, 2008).
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 13]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 171
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 171 
                                                                        
                  Yes, indeed, Chatterjee is aware that nationalists in the 19th century
              and Hindu nationalists made similar claims. From the recognition of the
              shortcoming of the ways in which nationalists deal with ‘our’ modernity, it
              doesn’t follow that the solution is to fall into the arms of ‘their’ modernity.
              The point is this: thanks, Immanuel Kant. Now, let us figure out how to
              pursue ‘our modernity’ once we reached maturity by gaining India’s inde-
              pendence in 1947 and expelling British colonists, their institutions and their
              ideals of progress, development and civilization. We have, so to speak, ‘our
              own’ ways of being. In fact, I would translate Chatterjee into my own
              vocabulary: ‘we know that we have to decolonize being, and to do so we have
              to start by decolonizing knowledge’. Which are the points made by
              Hountondji and Wiredu.                                    
                  And this takes me to the third example.               
                  Linda Tuhiwai Smith is an anthropologist in New Zealand, and she is
              a Maori national. That is, Maori nationals are people who co-existed in the
              land since the British began their management of New Zealand. James
              Busby was named as ‘Official British Resident’ in May 1833 and was
              instructed to organize the Maori chiefs in a united body to deal with the
              increasing instability provoked by the greediness manifested by the French,
              the Americans and the British themselves. As it is well known, Maoris did
              not care about ‘private property’ but Europeans did. Beginning in the 16th
              century, the ‘New World’ increased their appetite to transform land into
              private property.                                         
                  In Pletsch’s article, anthropology (that is, the Western discipline
              thus named) was assigned the Third World in the scientific distribution
              of labor that reorganized the politics of knowledge during the Cold War.
              Now, it is not a secret that quantitatively the majority of anthropologists,
              men and women, were white and Euro-Americans. However, anthropol-
              ogy as a discipline also found its niche in the Third World. What, then,
              would a Third World anthropologist do when he or she is part of the
              ‘object of study’ of a First World anthropologist? This is an uncomfort-
              able situation that has been addressed in Hountondji’s articles cited
              above. One answer to the question is that a Third World anthropologist
              would do the same job and ask similar questions as a First World anthro-
              pologist, and the difference will be that he or she will be ‘studying’ people
              living in his or her own country. There will be variations depending on
              whether in a given country the nationals are ‘natives’ or ‘of European
              descent’. It was more commonly accepted that anthropologists in the Third
              World would be of European descent – for example, in South America,
              South Africa or Australia. The end result is that, in general, anthropolog-
              ical research in ex-colonial regions would be dependent and secondary to
              anthropology as taught and practiced in the First World – nothing new or
              remarkable here.                                          
                  The remarkable novelty comes when a Maori becomes an anthropol -
              ogist and she practices anthropology as a Maori rather than studying the
              Maori as an anthropologist. Let me explain, starting with a quotation from
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 14]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 172
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             172 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             Linda T. Smith’s Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous
             Peoples(1999). One section of the first chapter is titled ‘On Being Human’:
                One of the supposed characteristics of primitive peoples was that we could
                not use our minds or intellects. We could not invent things, we could not
                create institutions or history, we could not imagine, we could not produce
                anything of value, we did not know how to use land and other resources from
                the natural world, we did not practice the ‘arts’ of civilization. By lacking
                such values we disqualified ourselves, not just from civilization but from
                humanity itself. In other words, we were not ‘fully human’; some of us were
                not even considered partially human. Ideas about what counted as human in
                association with the power to define people as human or not human were
                already encoded in imperial and colonial discourses prior to the period of
                imperialism covered here. (1999: 25, emphasis added)    
             No, she is not still practicing Western anthropology: she is precisely
             shifting the geography of reasoning and subsuming anthropological tools
             into Maori (instead of Western) cosmology and ideology. China is a capi-
             talist country, but I wouldn’t say that China is ‘practicing Western capital-
             ism’. Certainly, there is a self-serving interest in Smith’s move as much as
             there is a self-serving interest among European anthropologists observing
             the Maori. The only difference is that the self-interest does not always
             coincide, and Maoris are no longer amenable to being the object observed
             by a European anthropologist. Well, you get the idea of the interrelations
             between the politics of identity and epistemology. You could certainly be
             a Maori and an anthropologist and by being an anthropologist suppress the
             fact that you are Maori or Black Caribbean or Aymara. Or you can choose
             the decolonial option: engage in knowledge-making to ‘advance’ the Maori
             causeratherthatto‘advance’thediscipline(e.g.anthropology).Whywould
             someone be interested in advancing the discipline if not for either
             alienation or self-interest?                               
                If you engage in the decolonial option and put anthropology ‘at your
             service’ like Smith does, then you engage in shifting the geography of reason
             – in unveiling and enacting geopolitics and body-politics of knowledge. You
             can also say that there are non-Maori anthropologists of Euro-American
             descent who are really for and concerned with the mistreatment of Maoris,
             and that they are really working to remedy the situation. In that case, the
             anthropologists could follow two different paths. One would be in line with
             Father Bartolomé de las Casas and with Marxism (Marxism being a
             European invention responding to European problems). When Marxism
             encounters ‘people of color’, men or women, the situation becomes parallel
             to anthropology: being Maori (or Aymara, or Afro-Caribbean, like Aimé
             Césaire and Frantz Fanon) is not necessarily a smooth relation because
             Marxism privileged class relations over racial hierarchies and patriarchal
             and heterosexual normativity. The other would be to ‘submit’ to the guidance
             of Maori or Aymara anthropologists and engage with them in the decolonial
             option. A politics of identity is different from identity politics – the former
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 15]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 173
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 173 
                                                                        
              is open to whoever wants to join, while the latter tends to be bounded by
              the definition of a given identity.                       
                  I am not saying that a Maori anthropologist has epistemic privileges
              over a New Zealand anthropologist of Anglo descent (or a British or US
              anthropologist). I am saying that a New Zealand anthropologist of Anglo
              descent has no rightto guide the ‘locals’ in what is good or bad for the Maori
              population. That is precisely the problem that appears in the report of the
              Harvard International Review, where a group of US experts believe they can
              really decide what is good and what is bad for ‘developing countries’.
              Granted, there are many locals in developing countries who, because of
              imperial and capitalist cosmology, were led to believe (or pretended they
              believed) that what is good for developed countries is good for underdevel-
              oped as well because the former know ‘how to get there’ and can lead the
              way for underdeveloped countries to reach the same level. I am just saying,
              following Wiredu’s dictum (‘African, know thyself’), that there is a good
              chance that Maoris would know what is good or bad for them better than an
              expert from Harvard or a white anthropologist from New Zealand. And there
              is also a good chance that an expert from Harvard may ‘know’ what is good
              for him or her and his or her people, even when he or she thinks that they
              are stating what is good for ‘them’, the underdeveloped countries and people.
                  Returning to the quotation by Smith, it would also be possible to object
              to the paragraph quoted above, that ‘we’ denounces an essentialist concep-
              tion of being Maori or that ‘we’ indeed is not a tenable stance at the time
              when post-modernist theories really ended with the idea of a coherent and
              homogeneous subject, be it individual or collective. But ... remember
              Chatterjee. It would be fine and comfortable for modern Western subjects
              (that is, embodying the languages, memories and cosmology of Western
              modernity, ‘their’ modernity). It would not be convenient for a Maori, Aymara
              or Ghanian philosopher or an Indian from Calcutta who are modern/colonial
              subjects and would rather have ‘our modernity’ than to listen to vanguard
              post-modern critics or Western experts on developing underdeveloped
              countries. Thus, geo-politics of knowledge comes to the fore. There are many
              kinds of ‘our modernity’ around the globe – Ghanian, Indian, Maori, Afro
              Caribbean, North African, Islamic in their extended diversity – while there
              is one ‘their’ modernity within the ‘heterogeneity’ of France, England,
              Germany and the United States.                            
                  If you are getting the idea of what shifting the geography of reason and
              enacting geo-politics of knowledge means, you will also be understanding
              what the decolonial option in general (or decolonial options in each partic-
              ular and local history) means. It means, in the first place, to engage in
              epistemic disobedience, as is clear in the three examples I offered. Epistemic
              disobedience is necessary to take on civil disobedience (Gandhi, Martin
              Luther King) to its point of non-return. Civil disobedience, within modern
              Western epistemology (and remember: Greek and Latin, and six vernacular
              European modern and imperial languages), could only lead to reforms, not
              to transformations. For this simple reason, the task of decolonial thinking
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 16]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 174
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             174 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             and the enactment of the decolonial option in the 21st century starts from
             epistemic de-linking: from acts of epistemic disobedience. 
             IV                                                         
             In all three cases (and my own argument as the fourth case) I have under-
             lined the geo-politics of knowledge, which is what comes across more force-
             fully, although the body-politics of knowledge is obvious in all of them. What
             do I mean by the body-politics of knowledge? Frantz Fanon is again useful
             to set the stage, and I do so not through Homi Bhabha but through Lewis
             Gordon’s and Sylvia Wynter’s reading of Fanon.             
                Before, a disclaimer is necessary. Much has been said and written
             about Michel Foucault’s concept of bio-politics. Bio-politics refers to
             emerging state technologies (strategies, in a more traditional vocabulary) of
             population control that went hand in hand with the emergence of the modern
             nation-state. Foucault devoted his attention mainly to Europe, but such
             technologies were applied to the colonies as well. In Argentina (and South
             America in general), for example, the push for eugenics toward the end of
             the 19th century has been studied in detail lately. The differences between
             bio-politics in Europe and bio-politics in the colonies lie in the racial
             distinction between the European population (even when bio-politically
             managed by the state) and the population of the colonies: less human, sub-
             humans, as Smith pointed out. But it is also important to remember that
             bio-political techniques enacted on colonial populations returned as a
             boomerang to Europe in the Holocaust. Many have already underlined the
             uses of colonial techniques applied to non-European populations to control
             and exterminate the Jewish population. This consideration shifts the geog-
             raphy of reason and illuminates the fact that the colonies were not a second-
             ary and marginal event in the history of Europe but, on the contrary, colonial
             history is the non-acknowledged center in the making of modern Europe.
                Thus, body-politics is the darker side and the missing half of bio-
             politics: body-politics describes decolonial technologies enacted by bodies
             who realized that they were considered less human at the moment they
             realized that the very act of describing them as less human was a radical
             un-human consideration. Thus, the lack of humanity is placed in imperial
             actors, institutions and knowledges that had the arrogance of deciding that
             certain people they did not like were less human. Body-politics is a
             fundamental component of decolonial thinking, decolonial doing and the
             decolonial option.                                         
                Historically, geo-politics of knowledge emerged in the ‘Third World’
             contesting the imperial distribution of scientific labor that Pletsch mapped
             out. Body-politics of knowledge has had its more pronounced manifestations
             in the United States, as a consequence of the Civil Rights movement. Who
             were the main actors of the body-politics of knowledge? Women – first white
             women, soon joined by women of color (and linking with geo-politics, so-
             called ‘Third World women’); Latino and Latina scholars and activists;
             Afro-Americans and Native Americans, mainly.               
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 17]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 175
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 175 
                                                                        
                  Conceptually, the body-politics of knowledge emerged viscerally in
              Frantz Fanon’s Black Skin, White Masks:                   
                                                                        
                  Reacting against the constitutionalist tendency of the late nineteenth century,
                  Freud insisted that the individual factor be taken into account through
                  psychoanalysis. He substituted for a phylogenetic theory the ontogenetic
                  perspective. It will be seen that the black man’s alienation is not an individ-
                  ual question. Beside phylogeny and ontogeny stands sociogeney. In one sense,
                  conforming to the view of Leconte and Damey, let us say this is a question of
                  sociodiagnostics.10(1967 [1952]: 11)                  
              Fanon’s sociogenesis put a halt to scientific assumptions and findings that
              relate to the ‘nature’ of human beings and establish the limits of scientific
              theories from evolution to neurosciences in their capacity to decide on
              question of ‘human nature’. That is not to say that scientific theories from
              evolution to neuroscience have nothing to say about the materiality of
              living organisms propelled by nervous systems, but there are many thou-
              sands of miles from there to reach a conclusion about ‘human natures’.
              Furthermore, sociogenesis locates its origins not in the creation of the
              world by God or the Big Bang, but in the formation of the modern/colonial
              world that placed Negros on the lower scale of the Renaissance idea of
              Man and of Human Beings. For, that is what sociogenesis is: there is no
              phylogenetic or ontogenetic knowledge that can account for the moment
              when, in Paris, Fanon heard that child telling her mother, with surprise
              and astonishment, ‘Look, Mom, a Negro!’ He devoted an entire chapter to
              this moment.                                              
                  The chapter in question was interestingly translated into English as
              ‘The Fact of Blackness’. A very positivistic, very ontic oriented translation
              that points the reader toward the surface: look at the ‘fact’, do not ask onto-
              logical questions. The chapter’s title in French reads: ‘L’experience vécue du
              Noir’. The original title brings experience, not fact, to the foreground. But
              not ‘experience in general’, which will be based on a concept of ‘human
              being’ conceived within European hegemonic knowledge and modern and
              post-modern ideas that molded the universal concept of humanity (as in the
              Universal Declaration of Human Rights). All that is fine but is quite
              irrelevant for the point Fanon is making: ‘the lived experience of the Negro’
              has been formed in the racial matrix of the modern/colonial world, from the
              place Christianity attributed to the blacks (sons of Ham) and the fact that
              Christianity came to be the leading epistemic force in the classification of
              people and places in the 16th century when slavery became indistinguish-
              able from blackness. From then on, it was a particular framing of social and
              psychological dimensions where ‘the lived experience’ of the Negro would
              always be formed by the gaze of the white. Sylvia Wynter encapsulated this
              conceptual and experiential anchor when she said that ‘Fanon’s explanatory
              concept of sociogeny put forward as a third person response to his own first
              person questioning’ set the question: ‘What does it mean to be a Negro?’
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 18]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 176
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             176 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             From that point on the question is no longer to study the Negro using the
             arsenal of neuroscience, social sciences, and the like, but it is the Negro
             body that engages in knowledge-making to decolonize the knowledge that
             was responsible for the coloniality of his being. Fanon’s move is at once
             epistemic de-linking and epistemic disobedience. The decolonial option in
             epistemology and politics began to fly.                    
             V                                                          
             We are now in a position to extend Benveniste’s formal apparatus of enun-
             ciation to account for knowledge-making and the global power differential
             in knowledge-making described in the previous sections.    
                Knowledge-making in the modern/colonial world is at once knowledge
             in which the very concept of ‘modernity’ rests and the judge and warrantor
             of legitimate and sustainable knowledge. Vandana Shiva (1993) suggested
             ‘monocultures of the mind’ to describe Western imperial knowledge, its
             totalitarian and epistemically non-democratic implementation.11
                Knowledge-making presupposes a semiotic code (languages, images,
             sounds, colors, etc.) shared between users in semiotic exchanges. It is a
             common human endeavor (I would say of any living organism, since without
             ‘knowing’ life cannot be sustained). Taking a short cut from general condi-
             tions of knowledge-making among human beings sensu largo(that is, without
             racist and gender/sexual normativity) to knowledge-making in the organiza-
             tion of society, institutions are created that accomplish two functions:
             training of new (epistemic obedient) members and control of who enters and
             what knowledge-making is allowed, disavowed, devalued or celebrated.
                Knowledge-making entrenched with imperial/colonial purposes, from
             the European Renaissance to the US neoliberalism (that is, political
             economy as advanced by F.A. Hayek and Milton Friedman) that guided the
             last stage of globalization (from Ronald Reagan to the Wall Street collapse),
             was grounded – as mentioned before – in specific languages, institutions
             and geo-historical locations. The languages of Western imperial/knowledge-
             making (and the self-definition of the West – the West of Jerusalem – by
             social actors that saw themselves as Western Christians) were practiced
             (speaking and writing) by social actors (human beings) dwelling in a specific
             geo-historical space, with specific memories that said actors constructed and
             reconstructed in the process of creating their own Christian, Western and
             European identity.                                         
                Briefly, the formal apparatus of enunciation is the basic apparatus for
             engaging in institutional and purposive knowledge-making geo-politically
             oriented. Originally theology was the overarching conceptual and cosmo -
             logical frame of knowledge-making in which social actors engaged and
             institutions (monasteries, churches, universities, states, etc.) were created.
             Secularization, in the 18th century, displaced Christian theology and secular
             philosophy and science took its place. Both frames, theological and secular,
             bracketed their geo-historical foundation and, instead, made of theology and
             philosophy/science a frame of knowledge beyond geo-historical and body
             location. The subject of theological knowledge depended on the dictates of
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 19]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 177
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 177 
                                                                        
              God while the subject of secular philosophy/science depended on Reason,
              on the Cartesian ego/mind and Kant’s transcendental reason. Thus, Western
              imperial knowledge was cast in Western imperial languages and was theo-
              politically and ego-politically founded. Such foundation legitimizes the
              assumptions and claims that knowledge was beyond bodies and places and
              that Christian theology and secular philosophy and science were the limits
              of knowledge-making beyond and besides which all knowledge was lacking:
              folklore, myth, traditional knowledge, were invented to legitimize imperial
              epistemology.                                             
                  Theo- and ego-politics of knowledge also bracketed the body in knowl-
              edge-making (Mignolo, 2007a). By locating knowledge in the mind only, and
              bracketing ‘secondary qualities’ (affects, emotions, desires, anger, humilia-
              tion, etc.), social actors who happened to be white, inhabiting Europe/
              Western Christendom and speaking specific languages assumed that what
              was right for them in that place and which fulfilled their affects, emotions,
              fears and angers was indeed valid for the rest of the planet and, conse-
              quently, that they were the depositor, warrantor, creator and distributor of
              universal knowledge.                                      
                  In the process of globally enacting the European system of belief and
              structure of knowledge, human beings who were not Christian did not
              inhabit the memories of Europe, from Greece through Rome, were not
              familiar with the six modern imperial European languages and, frankly, did
              not care much about all of that until they realized that they were expected
              and requested to submit to the European (and in the 20th century to the
              United States also) knowledge, belief, life style and world view.
                  Responses to the contrary came, since the 16th century, from all over
              the globe, but imperial theo- and ego-politics of knowledge managed to
              prevail through economically sustained institutions (universities, museums,
              delegations, state officers, armies, etc.). Now, the type of responses I am
              referring to were responses provoked by the making and remaking of the
              colonial matrix of power: a complex conceptual structure that guided actions
              in the domain of economy (exploitation of labor and appropriation of land/
              natural resources), authority (government, military forces), gender/sexuality
              and knowledge/subjectivity. Since the responses I am referring to were
              responses to the colonial matrix of power, I would describe such responses
              as decolonial (Mignolo, 2007b). The cases/examples I offered in Section III
              also show that in such responses decolonial geo-politics of knowledge
              confronted imperial theo- and ego-politically based assumptions on the
              universality of Western knowledge-making and institutional grounding.
                  But there is still another dimension in decolonial politics of knowl-
              edge relevant for my argument: the claim that knowledge-making for well
              being rather than for controlling and managing populations for imperial
              interest shall come from local experiences and needs, rather than from local
              imperial experiences and needs projected to the globe, invokes also the
              body-politics of knowledge. Why? Because not only regions and locales in
              which imperial languages were not ancestrally spoken and that were alien
              to the history of Greek and Latin were disqualified and the disqualification
                                                                        

[PAGE 20]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 178
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             178 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             filled with knowledge-product and knowledge-making in bodies and insti-
             tutions where the conceptual warranty of Greek and Latin legitimized the
             belief of their dwelling in the universal, but bodies too. Racism, as we sense
             it today, was the result of two conceptual inventions of imperial knowledge:
             that certain bodies were inferior to others, and that inferior bodies carried
             inferior intelligence. The emergence of a body-politics of knowledge is a
             second strand of decolonial thinking and the decolonial option.
                You can still argue that there are ‘bodies’ and ‘regions’ in need of
             guidance from developed ‘bodies’ and ‘regions’ that got there first and know
             how to do it. As an honest liberal, you would recognize that you do not want
             to ‘impose’ your knowledge and experience but to ‘work with the locals’. The
             problem is, what agenda will be implemented, yours or theirs? Back then
             to Chatterjee and Smith.                                   
                Decolonial thinking presupposes de-linking (epistemically and polit-
             ically) from the web of imperial knowledge (theo- and ego-politically
             grounded) from disciplinary management. A common topic of conversation
             today, after the financial crisis on Wall Street, is ‘how to save capitalism’.
             A decolonial question would be: ‘Why would you want to save capitalism
             and not save human beings? Why save an abstract entity and not the
             human lives that capitalism is constantly destroying?’ In the same vein,
             geo- and body-politics of knowledge, decolonial thinking and the decolo-
             nial option place human lives and life in general first rather than making
             claims for the ‘transformation of the disciplines’. But, still, claiming life
             and human lives first, decolonial thinking is not joining forces with ‘the
             politics of life in itself’ as Nikolas Rose (2007) has it. Rose’s ‘politics of
             life in itself’ is the last development in the ‘mercantilization of life’ and of
             ‘bio-power’ (as Foucault has it). In the ‘politics of life in itself’ political
             and economic strategies for controlling life at the same time as creating
             moreconsumersjoinforces.Bio-politics,inFoucault’sconception,wasone
             ofthepracticalconsequencesofanego-politicsofknowledgeimplemented
             in the sphere of the state. Politics of life in itself extends it to the market.
             Thus, politics of life in itself describes the enormous potential of bio-
             technology to generate consumers who invest their earnings in buying
             health-promoting products in order to maintain the reproduction of tech-
             nology that will ‘improve’ the control of human beings at the same time as
             creating more wealth through the money invested by consumers who buy
             health-promoting technology.                               
                This is the point where decolonial options, grounded in geo- and body-
             politics of knowledge, engage in both decolonizing knowledge and de -
             colonial knowledge-making, delinking from the web of imperial/modern
             knowledge and from the colonial matrix of power.           
             Notes                                                      
             1. This claim by now is widespread and is one of the basic points of projects of
             de-westernization in East and South East Asia. See the provocative arguments
             advanced by Kishore Mahbubani (2001).                      
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 21]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 179
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 179 
                                                                        
              2. To avoid misunderstanding, I am going back here to my semiotic training in
              France and to earlier publications on the topic (see Castro-Gómez, 2007, and also
              Mignolo, 1993).                                           
              3. Cf. the classical argument advanced by Bill Readings (1996). Readings looks
              mainly at the history of Euro-American universities. Starting from Readings, I
              explored the consequences of the colonial university(Santo Domingo, Mexico, Lima,
              Cordoba, all founded during the 16th century) and Harvard University (founded
              in 1636, when Descartes was publishing Discours de la méthode). See Mignolo
              (2003).                                                   
              4. For a historical account, see Heilbron (1995); Foucault (1966); Wallerstein et
              al. (1995). And if there is any doubt that ‘les sciences humaines’ (social sciences
              and the humanities in the US) are one and the same with ‘la pensé occidentale’,
              see Gusdorf (1967).                                       
              5. Secondary bibliography abounds. I have dealt with a specific aspect of the
              distinction between nomothetic and ideographic sciences, and between epistemol-
              ogy and explanation (the former) and hermeneutics and interpretation (the latter).
              See Mignolo (1989)                                        
              6. See: http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/179408/education/47455/Ancient-
              China                                                     
              7. See: http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/179408/education/47445/The-
              New-World-civilizations-of-the-Maya-Aztec-and-Inca;       
               8. See also in this respect the ground-breaking study by Lewis Gordon (1995).
               9. See: http://www.harvardir.org/articles/1324/          
              10. The issue was taken up by Sylvia Wynter (2001) and also by Lewis Gordon
              (2006). An insightful summary and update can be found in Karen M. Cagne (2007).
              11. An interview on the topic can be found at http://www.indiatogether.org/2003/
              apr/ivw-vandana.htm                                       
              References                                                
              Agnew, John (2007) ‘Know-Where: Geographies of Knowledge of World Politics’,
              International Political Sociology1: 138–48.               
              Benveniste, Emile (1970) ‘L’appareil formel de l’enunciation’, Langages17: 12–18.
              Cagne, Karen M. (2007) ‘On the Obsolescence of the Disciplines: Frantz Fanon and
              Sylvia Winter Propose a New Mode of Being Human’, Human Architecture: Journal
              of the Sociology of Self-Knowledge5 (Summer): 251–64.     
              Cash, Richard (2005) ‘Research Imbalance: Taking Science to the Problem’,
              Harvard International Review22 March. http://www.harvardir.org/articles/1324/2/
              Castro-Gómez, Santiago (2007) ‘The Missing Chapter of Empire: Postmodern Re-
              organization of Coloniality and Post-Fordist Capitalism’, Cultural Studies21(2–3):
              428–48.                                                   
              Chatterjee, Partha (1998) ‘Talking about Our Modernity in Two Languages’,
              pp. 263–85 in A Possible India: Essays in Political Criticism. Calcutta: Oxford
              University Press.                                         
              Chukwudi Eze, Emmanuel (1997) ‘The Color of Reason: The Idea of “Race” in
              Kant’s Anthropology’, pp. 103–40 in Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze (ed.) Postcolonial
              African Philosophy. London: Blackwell.                    
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 22]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 180
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             180 Theory, Culture & Society 26(7–8)                      
                                                                        
             Dilthey, Wilhelm (1991) Introduction to the Human Sciences. Princeton: Princeton
             University Press.                                          
             Fanon, Frantz (1967 [1952]) Black Skin, White Masks, trans. Charles L. Markmann.
             New York: Grove Press.                                     
             Foucault, Michel (1966) Les mots et les choses. Paris: Gallimard.
             Gordon, Lewis (1995) Fanon and the Crisis of European Man: An Essay on Philos-
             ophy and the Human Sciences. London: Routledge.            
             Gordon, Lewis (2006) ‘Is the Human a Teleological Suspension of Man? A Phenom-
             enological Exploration of Sylvia Wynter’s Fanonian Biodicean Reflections’,
             pp. 237–57 in Anthony Bogues (ed.) After Man, Towards the Human: Critical Essays
             on Sylvia Wynter. Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers.         
             Gusdorf, Georges (1967) Les origines des sciences humaines et la pensée occidentale.
             Paris: Payot.                                              
             Heilbron, Johan (1995) The Rise of Social Theory, trans. Sheila Gogol. Minneapolis:
             University of Minnesota Press.                             
             Hountondji, Paulin J. (1992 [1983]) ‘Recapturing’, pp. 238–48 in V.Y. Mudimbe
             (ed.) The Surreptitious Speech: Presence Africaine and the Politics of Otherness,
             1947–1987. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.           
             Kant, Immanuel (1991 [1798]) ‘The Contest of Faculties’, in Hans Reiss (ed.) Kant:
             Political Writings, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
             Mahbubani, Kishore (2001) Can Asians Think? Understanding the Divide Between
             East and West. Hannover: Steerforth Press.                 
             Mignolo, Walter D. (1983) ‘Comprensión hermenéutica y comprensión teórica’,
             Revista de Literatura90: 5–38.                             
             Mignolo, Walter D. (1989) ‘Teorías literarias o de la literature/Qué son y para qué
             sirven?’, pp. 41–78 in Graciela Reyes (ed.) Teorias literarias en la actualidad.
             Madrid: Ediciones El Arquero.                              
             Mignolo, Walter D. (1993) ‘Colonial and Postcolonial Discourse: Cultural Critique
             or Academic Colonialism?’, Latin American Research Review28(3): 120–31.
             Mignolo, Walter D. (1999) ‘I Am Where I Think: Epistemology and the Colonial
             Difference’, Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies8(2): 235–45.
             Mignolo, Walter D. (2002) ‘Geopolitics of Knowledge and the Colonial Difference’,
             South Atlantic Quarterly103(1): 57–96.                     
             Mignolo, Walter D. (2003) ‘Globalization and the Geopolitics of Knowledge: The
             Role of the Humanities in the Corporate University’, Nepantla: Views from South
             4(1): 97–119.                                              
             Mignolo, Walter D. (2005 [1995]) ‘Human Understanding and (Latin) American
             Interests: The Politics and Sensibilities of Geo-Historical Locations’, in Henry
             Schartz and Sangeeta Ray (eds) A Companion to Postcolonial Studies. London:
             Blackwell.                                                 
             Mignolo, Walter D. (2007a) ‘Delinking: The Rhetoric of Modernity, the Logic of
             Coloniality and the Grammar of Decolniality’, Cultural Studies21(2–3): 449–514.
             Mignolo, Walter D. (2007b) ‘The Decolonial Option and the Meaning of Identity in
             Politics’, Anales Nueva Epoca (Instituto Iberoamericano Universidad de Goteborg)
             9/10: 43–72.                                               
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 23]
      159-181 TCS349275 Mignolo_Article 156 x 234mm 06/01/2010 16:21 Page 181
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Mignolo– Epistemic Disobedience 181 
                                                                        
              Mignolo, Walter D. (2008) ‘Epistemic Disobedience and the Decolonial Option: A
              Manifesto’, Subaltern Studies: An Interdisciplinary Study of Media and Communi-
              cation, 2 February. http://subalternstudies.com/?p=193.   
              Mignolo, Walter D. (forthcoming) ‘The Darker Side of the Enlightenment: A De-
              colonial Reading of Kant’s Geography’, in Stuart Elden and Eduardo Mendieta (eds)
              Readings on Kant’s Geography. Stony Brook: Stony Brook Press.
              Pletsch, Carl E. (1981) ‘The Three Worlds, or the Division of Social Scientific Labor,
              circa 1950–1975’, Comparative Studies in Society and History23(4): 565–90.
              Readings, Bill (1996) The University in Ruins. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
              sity Press.                                               
              Rose, Nikolas (2007) The Politics of Life Itself. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
              Shiva, Vandana (1993) The Monocultures of the Mind: Perspectives in Biodiversity.
              London: Zed Books.                                        
              Smith, Linda Tuhiwai (1999) Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and Indigenous
              Peoples. London and New York: Zed Books.                  
              Todorov, Tzvetan (1970) ‘Problèmes de l’enunciation’ [introduction to a mono-
              graphic issue], Languages17: 3–11.                        
              Wallerstein, Immanuel et al. (1995) Open the Social Sciences: Report of the
              Gulbenkian Commission of the Restructuring of the Social Sciences. Stanford:
              Stanford University Press.                                
              Wiredu, Kwasi (1992) ‘Formulating Modern Thoughts in African Languages: Some
              Theoretical Considerations’, pp. 301–32 in V.Y. Mudimbe (ed.) The Surreptitious
              Speech: Presence Africaine and the Politics of Otherness, 1947–1987. Chicago:
              University of Chicago Press.                              
              Wiredu, Kwasi (1998) ‘Toward Decolonizing African Philosophy and Religion’,
              African Studies Quarterly. The Online Journal of African Studies1(4).
              Wynter, Sylvia (2001) ‘Towards the Sociogenic Principle: Fanon, the Puzzle of
              Conscious Experience, and What It Is Like to Be ‘Black’’, pp. 30–66 in Mercedes
              F. Duran-Cogan and Antonio Gómez-Moriana (eds) National Identities and Socio -
              political Changes in Latin America. New York: Routledge.  
              Walter D. Mignolo is William H. Wannamaker Professor of Romance
              Studies and Literature at Duke University and Director of the Center for
              Global Studies and the Humanities (http://trinity.duke.edu/globalstudies).
              Publications include The Darker Side of the Renaissance: Literacy, Territo-
              riality and Colonization(1995; awarded the Catherine Singer Kovacs Prize),
              Local Histories/Global Designs: Coloniality, Subaltern Knowledges and
              Border Thinking(2000) and The Idea of Latin America(2005; winner of the
              Frantz Fanon Award from the Philosophical Caribbean Association). His
              next book, the third of the trilogy with The Darker Side and Local Histories,
              will be published by Duke University Press and is titled The Darker Side
              of Western Modernity: Global Futures, Decolonial Options. [email: walter.
              mignolo@gmail.com]                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        