[PAGE 1]
 1196829                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764231196829Theory, Culture & SocietyNachtwey and Seidl
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       The Solutionist Ethic and the          2024, Vol. 41(2) 91 –112
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
       Spirit of Digital Capitalism                          
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
                                          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462432131119966882299
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Oliver Nachtwey                                       
       University of Basel                                   
       Timo Seidl                                            
       University of Vienna                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Digital technologies are rapidly transforming economies and societies. Scholars have
       approached this rise of digital capitalism from various angles. However, relatively little
       attention has been paid to digital capitalism’s cultural underpinnings and the beliefs of
       those who develop most digital technologies. In this paper, we argue that a solutionist
       order of worth – in which value derives from solving social problems through technology
       – has become central to an emerging spirit of digital capitalism. We use supervised
       learning to trace the relative importance of different orders of worth in three novel
       text corpora. We find that solutionism is indeed central to the normative beliefs of
       digital elites and the broader digital milieu, but not to capitalist discourse at large.
       We illustrate the importance of these findings by discussing how the spirit of digital
       capitalism motivates, legitimates, and orients the actions of digital capitalists.
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       digital capitalism, digitalization, Silicon Valley, spirit of capitalism, text-as-data
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
       From meeting people to building things, from ordering food to consuming news, digitali-
       zation is transforming contemporary economies and societies. Existing scholarship has
       approached the accompanying rise of ‘digital capitalism’ (Seidl, 2023; Staab, 2019) from
       different angles. Some scholars have focused on the growing use of digital surveillance
       and manipulation (Tirole, 2021; Zuboff, 2019); others on the central role of digital plat-
       forms (Stark and Pais, 2020; Vallas and Schor, 2020) or the (variegated) organizational
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Timo Seidl. Email: timo.seidl@univie.ac.at
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      92                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      logic of digital capitalism (Davis and Sinha, 2021; Rahman and Thelen, 2019); yet others
      on the implications of digitalization for labor markets (Frey, 2019), political behavior
      (Gallego and Kurer, 2022), welfare states (Busemeyer et al., 2022) or growth models
      (Hassel and Palier, 2020); and still others on the political power of tech companies and
      the comparative politics of their (non-)regulation (Culpepper and Thelen, 2019; Thelen,
      2018).                                                 
        However, relatively little scholarly attention has been paid to how those that design,
      develop and deploy the majority of digital technologies (claim to) see the world and their
      role in it. Complementing recent work on the cultural and political attitudes of tech
      workers (Dorschel, 2022; Selling and Strimling, 2023), we look at the beliefs of digital
      elites themselves as well as at the ideas prevalent in the wider tech milieu and capitalist
      discourse at large. Specifically, we add a novel theoretical and empirical perspective to
      existing survey-based (Broockman et al., 2019), text-based (Brockmann et al., 2021;
      Little and Winch, 2021), historical (Barbrook and Cameron, 1996; Turner, 2006), and
      discursive (Daub, 2020; Fisher, 2010; Haupt, 2021; Pfotenhauer et al., 2022) research on
      the ideas and ideology of digital capitalism in general and Silicon Valley in particular.1
      Our approach is not meant to supersede these approaches, but to add an additional per-
      spective to our understanding of the normative and cultural underpinnings of digital
      capitalism – one that is grounded in a rich tradition of scholarship ranging back to Werner
      Sombart and Max Weber.                                 
        Theoretically, we combine the concept of technological solutionism (Morozov,
      2013) with the ‘economics of convention’ reinterpretation of the Weberian concept of
      the spirit of capitalism’ (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007; Boltanski and Thévenot,
      2006). Following Weber, we define the spirit of capitalism as the combination of nor-
      mative beliefs that legitimate, motivate, and orient the actions of capitalist actors (cf.
      Weber, 2007). And following the economics of convention, we conceptualize these
      normative beliefs as orders of worth or polities (cités) that define ‘the good, the just,
      and the fair – but according to different criteria of judgment’ (Stark, 2009: 12). We
      argue that solutionism constitutes a new order of worth that characterizes – although
      not exclusively – the spirit of digital capitalism, i.e. the beliefs that legitimate, moti-
      vate, and orient the actions of today’s digital elites (founders, venture capitalists, sen-
      ior engineers and managers, etc.).                     
        Solutionism refers to the belief that the use of digital technologies – by inventive
      and cunning entrepreneurs – is the royal road to fixing social problems. This strange
      ‘mix of commerce and cause’ (Slee, 2016: 9) is based on the assumption that there is a
      techno-entrepreneurial solution to every social problem (Morozov, 2013: 5). For solu-
      tionists, there is no contradiction between making money and making the world a bet-
      ter place; in fact, the world’s biggest problems are also the world’s biggest business
      opportunities. Thus, much like the early Protestants believed that economic success is
      a sign of chosenness, the solutionist entrepreneurs are convinced that if they are doing
      good, they will also do well; and conversely, that if they are doing well, they must also
      be doing good. This is not to say that digital elites cannot deceive themselves and oth-
      ers about what they believe. Nor is it to say that they – like other ‘enlightened capital-
      ists’ before them – will not often put principles over profits given the capitalist laws of
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                             93     
                                                             
       motion (cf. O’Toole, 2019). But professed – and, we would argue, often genuinely held
       – beliefs still matter if they influence how employees, policymakers and the public
       perceive digital elites, and how these elites themselves decide under conditions of
       uncertainty.                                          
        Empirically, we developed a coding scheme to classify statements as expressions of
       different orders of worth. We then used a supervised classification method (Hopkins
       and King, 2010; Jerzak et al., 2022) to identify and trace the relative importance of
       different orders of worth in three novel text corpora: a corpus of digital elites’ public
       speeches and interviews, of articles in Wired Magazine, and of articles in the Harvard
       Business Review. Based on these three corpora, we find that solutionist ideas are (i)
       indeed central to how digital elites see themselves, to embody, as it were, the ‘spirit of
       the founders’ (Little and Winch, 2021: 14); (ii) have also become increasingly impor-
       tant in broader debates on digitalization; but (iii) remain still marginal in capitalist
       discourse at large which, for now, is still characterized by Boltanski and Chiapello’s
       project-based ‘new spirit of capitalism’ (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007). While the
       focus of this paper is to descriptively map the broad contours of the spirit of digital
       capitalism, we also discuss our findings and illustrate their importance in light of pri-
       mary and secondary literature on the motivating, legitimizing, and orienting role of
       (normative) ideas. In addition, while we follow in Weber’s footsteps by analyzing an
       emerging capitalist spirit in a spatially concentrated area – Geneva in his case, Silicon
       Valley in ours – we encourage further research on the complex dynamics of geographi-
       cal and social diffusion and translation.             
        Our paper proceeds as follows. We first provide a conceptual history of the concept of
       the spirit of capitalism. We then describe the solutionist order of worth in detail. Next, we
       introduce our data and methodological approach. We then present our findings and dis-
       cuss their importance for understanding digital capitalism. We conclude with a discus-
       sion on the future of the spirit of digital capitalism in times of ‘techlash’, pandemic, and
       the unabated rise of digital technologies.            
       The Spirit of Capitalism – Revisited                  
       The concept of the capitalist spirit undoubtedly belongs to the most colorful and contro-
       versial concepts in the history of sociological thought. It was first introduced by Werner
       Sombart in Der moderne Kapitalismus. For Sombart, every economic epoch was defined
       as much by its predominant economic attitudes – its spirit – as by its institutional form
       (Sombart, 1902). By arguing that the capitalist spirit was defined by a combination of
       acquisitiveness and economic rationalism, Sombart laid the conceptual groundwork for
       an inquiry into capitalism’s ideational underpinnings (Sombart, 1902: 391). Sombart
       also had already emphasized the ‘general acceptance’ (Sombart, 1902: 379) which the
       spirit lent to acquisitive and rationalistic attitudes and its role in creating and sustaining
       capitalism’s ‘dominant motives’ (Sombart, 1902: XXI). 
        Max Weber borrowed Sombart’s concept in his famous study The Protestant Ethic
       and the Spirit of Capitalism. What Weber had in mind, however, was less a cognitive
       attitude than a ‘peculiar ethic’ (Weber, 2007: 17). Weber’s capitalist spirit is not ‘mere
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      94                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      business astuteness’ but an ‘ethos’, the violation of which ‘is treated not as foolishness
      but as forgetfulness of duty’ (Weber, 2007: 17). Like Sombart, Weber believed that the
      capitalist spirit subjectively motivated capitalist actions through ‘psychological sanc-
      tions’ (Weber, 2007: 145) and intersubjectively legitimated them by helping capitalism
      assert itself in a ‘world of hostile forces’ (Weber, 2007: 20–21; cf. Campbell, 2018: 12).
      Weber also believed that ideas could play an orienting role: like ‘switchmen’ (Weber,
      1946: 280), they can change the tracks on which (capitalist) actors pursue their economic
      interests.                                             
        Weber’s account, however, remained genealogical. The capitalist spirit fades away
      after having performed its midwifely function. Today’s capitalism, according to Weber,
      no longer needs the helping hand of its spirit, but ‘educates and selects [economic
      actors] through a process of economic survival of the fittest’ (Weber, 2007: 20). Almost
      a century later, this idea is picked up by Boltanski and Chiapello in The New Spirit of
      Capitalism. Building on Weber’s idea that ‘people need powerful moral reasons for
      rallying to capitalism’, they define the capitalist spirit as an ‘ideology that justifies
      engagement in capitalism’ (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007: 8–9). On the one hand, a
      ‘minimal argument in terms of compulsory submission to economic laws’ might be ‘a
      motive for staying in a job’, but it isn’t one ‘for getting involved in it’ (Boltanski and
      Chiapello, 2007: 8). On the other hand, capitalism needs to constantly assuage its
      ‘social’ and ‘artistic’ critics by selectively appropriating and thereby diffusing their
      critiques of the poverty, inequality, and exploitation (social critics) or alienation,
      oppression, and disenchantment (artistic critics) capitalism produces (Boltanski and
      Chiapello, 2007: 38).                                  
        Contrary to Weber, therefore, Boltanski and Chiapello do not believe capitalism can
      do without its spirit. But to effectively justify itself over time, capitalism needs ‘to draw
      upon resources external to it, beliefs which, at a given moment in time, possess consider-
      able powers of persuasion’ (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007: 20). Here, Boltanski and
      Chiapello draw on the economics of convention (Diaz-Bone and Salais, 2011) and argue
      that ‘modern economies comprise multiple principles of evaluation’ (Stark, 2009: 11).
      While all such principles – or orders of worth or polities (cités) – provide ‘justifications
      in terms of the common good’ (du Gay and Morgan, 2013: 13), they have different moral
      ‘grammars’ and different appeal in different contexts. 
        Table 1 provides a stylized reconstruction of the eight polities identified by the eco-
      nomics of convention (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007; Boltanski and Thévenot, 2006;
      Thévenot et al., 2000) and the solutionist polity introduced below. Most importantly,
      each polity defines what is valuable or worthy (e.g. efficiency in the industrial polity,
      recognition by others in the opinion polity). This is further specified by a criterion of
      evaluation (e.g. technical performance or productivity, fame or followers); a mode of
      investment or sacrifice (e.g. disenchantment, the forgoing of privacy); a distinct ideal
      representative (e.g. the manager, the celebrity); a type of insanity or pathology (e.g.
      squander, anonymity); an evaluation test (e.g. a formal test procedure, publicity); and a
      specific underlying anthropology and cosmology (e.g. the idea that the world can be
      mastered through calculation and planning, the idea of humans as craving for
      recognition).                                          
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                             95     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
              .weivrevo                                      
                                                             
                                                             
              ytiloP                                         
                                                             
              .1                                             
              elbaT                                          
                 tsinoituloS                                 
                 neerG                                       
                 tcejorP                                     
                 civiC                                       
                 noinipO                                     
                 citsemoD                                    
                 noitaripsnI                                 
                 lairtsudnI                                  
                 tekraM                                      
                 fo                                          
                 redrO                                       
                  noitacifitsuJ                              
                    laicos                                   
                    yek gnivloS                              
                    ytilibaniatsuS                           
                    )ytiligA(                                
                    ytivitcA                                 
                    dooG                                     
                    cilbuP                                   
                    noitingoceR                              
                    lacoL/lanoitidarT                        
                    ytilanigirO                              
                    ycneiciffE                               
                    )lacinhceT(                              
                    noititepmoC                              
                    eerF                                     
                    eulaV                                    
                    lartneC                                  
                     smelborp                                
                     ytirohtuA                               
                      gnilbanE                               
                      dna                                    
                      gnidargpU                              
                      ,ycneiciffuS                           
                      -fles                                  
                      lufsseccuS                             
                      ,denrevog                              
                      eluR                                   
                      emaf                                   
                      ,nwoneR                                
                      ,meetse                                
                      lacoL                                  
                      ,ytivitaerC                            
                      lacinhceT                              
                      ecirP                                  
                      ,eulaV                                 
                      noitaulavE                             
                       ytinamuH/snamuH                       
                       latnemnorivne                         
                       rebmun                                
                       ,tnemeganam                           
                       ,noitatneserper                       
                       noitingocer                           
                       lanosrep                              
                       ,ytimrofnoc-noN                       
                       ,ecnamrofrep                          
                       airetirC                              
                        ssenildneirf                         
                        dna                                  
                        stcejorp                             
                        fo                                   
                        ytiradilos                           
                        ,yticitnehtuA                        
                        ,ytivitcudorp                        
                         stcatnoc                            
                         ynahpipE                            
                         gninnalp                            
                          )eruliaF(                          
                          gnikaT-ksiR                        
                          gnidiovA                           
                          ytilibats                          
                          fo                                 
                          gniogroF                           
                          s’eno                              
                          gniogroF                           
                          gniogroF                           
                          rof                                
                          ytilibisnopseR                     
                          ni gnittif                         
                          toN                                
                          tnemtnahcnesiD                     
                          msinutroppO                        
                          fo                                 
                          edoM                               
                           seitilanretxE                     
                           stseretni                         
                           nwo                               
                           ycavirp                           
                           ot tnemhcatta                     
                           dna                               
                           tnemtsevni                        
                            lacol                            
                            eht/sroirefni                    
                            )ecifircas(                      
                             ruenerpertnE-orhtnalihP         
                             tsilatnemnorivnE                
                             fles                            
                             lairnerpretnE                   
                             ,tnavreS                        
                             cilbuP                          
                             ytirbeleC                       
                             hcrairtaP                       
                             )ynapmoC(                       
                             ,suineG                         
                             evitaerC                        
                             ,reenignE                       
                             tnahcrem                        
                             ,namssenisuB                    
                             epyT                            
                             laedI                           
                              naicitilop                     
                              suoutriv                       
                              tifsiM                         
                              trepxe                         
                              lanoisseforp                   
                                tuohtiw                      
                                ssenisuB                     
                                lanoitidnocnU                
                                ytivitcani                   
                                ,ytilibommI                  
                                noitpurroC                   
                                ytimynonA                    
                                noitpmuserP                  
                                ytimrofnoC                   
                                ,ytienatnopS                 
                                noitalugeR                   
                                ytinasnI                     
                                 tuohtiw                     
                                 esoprup                     
                                 ,esoprup                    
                                 htworG                      
                                 rednauqS                    
                                  ygolonhcet                 
                                  ,ygolonhcet                
                                   ssenisub                  
                                   a tuohtiw noitpursiD      
                                    yhtlaeH                  
                                    stcejorp                 
                                    wen                      
                                    gnidniF                  
                                    dna                      
                                    sthgir                   
                                    lauqE                    
                                    yticilbuP                
                                    ssenihtrowtsurT          
                                    lanigirO                 
                                    tset                     
                                    erudecorP                
                                    ssenevititepmoC          
                                    tseT                     
                                     tnemnorivnE             
                                     tartnoc(                
                                     seitud                  
                                     ,sthguoht               
                                      )laicos                
                                      ,noitnevni snoitaerc   
                                        tub                  
                                        swalf                
                                        evah                 
                                        snamuH               
                                        a deen               
                                        snamuH               
                                        sa                   
                                        snamuH               
                                        sa                   
                                        snamuH               
                                        sa                   
                                        snamuH               
                                        sa                   
                                        ynomrah              
                                        larutaN              
                                        fo citehtseA         
                                        yteicoS              
                                        dna erutaN           
                                        rieht                
                                        wollof               
                                        snamuH               
                                        /                    
                                        ygoloporhtnA         
                                         ygolonhcet          
                                         ,laitnetop          
                                         osla                
                                         elbats              
                                         ,suoinomrah         
                                         sevles              
                                         lairuenerpertne     
                                         slauqe              
                                         lacitilop           
                                         rof                 
                                         gnivarc             
                                         larutan             
                                         fo tluser           
                                         a                   
                                         dna                 
                                         suineG              
                                         eht                 
                                         deretsam            
                                         eb                  
                                         nac                 
                                         ,tseretni-fles      
                                         denethgilne         
                                         ygolomsoC           
                                          snoitautis         
                                          niw-niw            
                                          setaerc            
                                          htiw               
                                          pihsnoitaler       
                                          dlrow              
                                          detcennoc          
                                          a                  
                                          ni                 
                                          noitingocer        
                                          yhcrareih          
                                          fo                 
                                          ytimrofnoC         
                                          noitaluclac        
                                          hguorht            
                                          niw-niw            
                                          etaerc             
                                          stekram            
                                           tnemnorivne       
                                           rieht             
                                           sessam            
                                           eht               
                                           gninnalp          
                                           dna               
                                           )dnah             
                                           elbisivni(        
                                           snoitautis        

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      96                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
        The spirit of capitalism – in its historical evolution – draws on and combines these
      orders of worth, tapping into the moral resources they provide (Boltanski and Chiapello,
      2007: 16–19). It can be understood as the historically evolving combination of norma-
      tive beliefs that motivate, legitimate, and orient the actions of capitalist actors at differ-
      ent moments in capitalist history. For example, during the heyday of the managerial
      capitalism of the 20th century, the industrial polity – with its emphasis on rational
      organization and bureaucratic planning – becomes dominant at the expense of the
      domestic polity – the manager replaces the company patriarch as capitalism’s heroic
      figure. Similarly, in the 1970s, a new spirit of capitalism formed around the project-
      based polity and its values of agility, flexibility, and collaboration (Boltanski and
      Chiapello, 2007). Today, we argue, we see yet another spirit emerge in which an ethic
      of solutionism2 takes center stage, but which – like its predecessors – continues to draw
      on multiple orders of worth.                           
      The Ethic of Solutionism                               
      Evgeny Morozov defines solutionism as an ideology that recasts ‘all complex social situ-
      ations either as neatly defined problems with definite, computable solutions or as trans-
      parent and self-evident processes that can be easily optimized – if only the right algorithms
      are in place’ (Morozov, 2013: 5). Building on Morozov, we conceive of the solutionist
      polity as an order of worth in which value or worthiness derives from solving social prob-
      lems with technological means. This implies a view of the world in which all relevant
      social problems can, in principle, be solved technologically; in which there is a techno-
      logical hammer for every social nail. Social problems are not the result of asymmetries in
      power or wealth that call for a political solution. Rather, they are the result of inefficien-
      cies and deficiencies that can be eliminated with the right technology (Slee, 2016).
        While digital technologies have massively amplified the reach and appeal of solution-
      ist ideas (Morozov, 2013: 15–16), solutionism is not a product of the digital era but has
      deeper roots: in the culture of engineering and its belief that there is a ‘technological fix’
      to all societal problems (Johnston, 2017) as well as in the ‘New Communalist ethos of
      tool use’ (Turner, 2006: 238) and their faith ‘that experimentation and the proper deploy-
      ment of the right technologies could save the world’ (Turner, 2006: 244). These techno-
      optimist tendencies are amplified by the culture of coding, which nurtures an ‘almost
      aesthetic [. . .] dislike for inefficiency’ (Thompson, 2019: 21); and a hubristic control
      illusion that understands social problems in the same way as coding problems by extrap-
      olating from the programmer’s intuition that one ‘can program any procedure [one] thor-
      oughly understand[s]’ (Weizenbaum, 1976: 103–4). Such ‘computational thinking’
      (Denning and Tedre, 2019) is perfectly epitomized by Mark Zuckerberg’s belief that the
      ‘first principle’ of engineering is to ‘think of every problem as a system and every system
      can be better. No matter how good or bad it is, you can make every system better’.
        But despite the importance of technology, solutionists are more than just engineers or
      coders. They are, in Schumpeter’s sense, not inventors but innovators. An invention that
      cannot be commercialized is a bad invention. Larry Page realized this early, when read-
      ing a biography of Nicola Tesla, who was a brilliant inventor but a terrible innovator:
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                             97     
                                                             
        ‘You don’t want to be Tesla. He was one of the greatest inventors, but it’s a sad, sad story. He
        couldn’t commercialize anything, he could barely fund his own research. You’d want to be
        more like Edison. If you invent something, that doesn’t necessarily help anybody. You’ve got
        to actually get it into the world; you’ve got to produce, make money doing it so you can fund
        it.’ (quoted in Serwer, 2008)                        
       Therefore, to really make a difference, the solutionist needs to be an entrepreneur as
       much as a technologist. But solutionists are not just entrepreneurs; they are philanthro-
       entrepreneurs. In the solutionist worldview, making money and making the world a bet-
       ter place are not contradictory but can and should go hand in hand. Silicon Valley, as Tom
       Slee put it, ‘may have its share of the world’s richest people, but it has always seen itself
       and presented itself as being about more than money: it’s also about building a better
       future’ (Slee, 2016: 9). The solutionists not only abhor the lone inventors, who know
       their way with technology but have no business model. They also reject those who, like
       bankers on Wall Street, lack purpose and are only in it for the money.
        But purpose alone – without technology and a viable business model – is equally
       flawed. Hence the rejection of traditional politics as the best way to address social ills – a
       rejection that echoes the New Communalists’ turn ‘toward social and economic spheres
       as sites [of] social change’ (Turner, 2006: 244). Solutionism shares this sentiment with
       philanthrocapitalism – the idea and practice of applying a business logic to philanthropy
       in order to make it more efficient, impact-oriented and financially profitable (McGoey,
       2012). But while philanthrocapitalism is about the ‘idea that charity is good business’
       and can therefore be profitable (McGoey, 2012: 187), solutionism is about the idea that
       business itself can be philanthropic.                 
        In the solutionist worldview, there is a natural alignment between business opportu-
       nities and social problems. We live, as Silicon Valley guru Peter Diamandis puts it, in
       ‘a world where the biggest problems on the planet are the biggest market opportuni-
       ties’. Philanthropy is thus neither a separate stage of life nor a more or less profitable
       side business. Traditional philanthropists in the wake of Carnegie had espoused the
       idea that ‘after-the-fact benevolence justifies anything-goes capitalism; that callous-
       ness and injustice in the cutthroat [marketplace] are excused by later philanthropy’
       (Giridharadas, 2018: 164). For solutionists, doing good is not an atonement for doing
       well, but simply the other side of the same coin. ‘It’s been a yin and yang equation’, as
       Tom Werner once put it: ‘We’re changing the world on one side and building a great
       company on the other side’.                           
        Capitalists have of course long believed that the invisible hand of the market will
       transform private vices into public benefits. Solutionists, by contrast, believe that the
       companies with the grandest purpose will miraculously also be the companies with the
       biggest profit. Underlying this idea is an ‘almost religious faith’ (Giridharadas, 2018: 41)
       in the harmony of human interests and the ability of technologies to create win-win situ-
       ations (cf. Brandtner and Bromley, 2022).             
        What’s amazing about tech [. . .] is that there are so many opportunities to have your cake and
        eat it, too [. . .] There’s a stereotype that you have to choose in life between doing good and
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      98                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
        making money. I think for a lot of people that’s a real choice [. . .] But for technology, there are
        a significant number of opportunities – Google search being the most massive example of all
        time – where we simultaneously are doing something lucrative and really good for the world.
        [A] lot of times you can get in situations where they’re all aligned, where the bigger the reach
        of the good you’re doing, the more money you’ll make. (Justin Rosenstein in Giridharadas,
        2018: 41)                                            
      This notion is based on a worldview that understands the world as simultaneously flawed
      and full of potential. This is not just about gradually improving production processes in
      the name of (technical) efficiency as in the industrial polity. Instead, it is about the much
      grander idea that the entire social world is full of bugs but can also be fixed with the right
      technology and entrepreneurial mentality. It is therefore every solutionist’s calling to
      upgrade humanity by becoming a social engineer in the true sense of the word, culminat-
      ing in a apotheosis of disruption and ultimately a transhumanism that others have likened
      to ‘messianism’ (Daub, 2020) or the ‘birth of a religion’ (Lanier, 2017). Animated by the
      normative power of the possible, solutionists have little respect for the status quo – and
      the institutions that maintain it. Breaking the law thus becomes civil disobedience in the
      name of a better world. ‘You can’t change the world without a certain amount of healthy
      willingness to break the rules’, as Sebastian Thrun once put it. In the end, what constrains
      the solutionist quest to solve humanity’s oldest problems – old age, sickness, death –
      should only be the laws of physics, not those of society.
      Data and Empirical Approach                            
      To test our arguments, we collected three novel text corpora. Each corpus serves a
      distinct analytical purpose (for details on the corpora, see online Appendix A1–A3).
      The first corpus consists of public statements of digital elites in which they talk about
      themselves or their worldview (e.g. interviews, speeches). Digital elites are narrowly
      defined as members of the 2015 Forbes 400 who played crucial roles (e.g. founder,
      CEO, major investor) in tech companies founded after 1996, and therefore made most
      of their money in the last 20 years or so (it thus excludes ‘first-generation’ digital elites
      like Bill Gates and Steve Jobs). The purpose of this corpus – which consists of 2,326
      paragraphs – was to identify the spirit of digital capitalism where we would most
      expect it: in the professed beliefs of the most recent generation of digital elites – indi-
      viduals like Larry Page, Mark Zuckerberg or Elon Musk (cf. Brockmann et al., 2021:
      16). These are the (mostly) men that Little and Winch (2021) call the ‘new patriarchs
      of digital capitalism’ and whose close-knit ‘networks of power’ are central to the inner
      workings of digital capitalism.                        
        The second corpus consists of articles published in Wired between the magazine’s
      founding in 1994 and 2018. After removing very short paragraphs, we ended up with a
      total of c.1.5 million paragraphs. Wired is widely known as the house organ of the tech
      community. It is thus the perfect medium to understand the intellectual proclivities, fads,
      and currents of the wider tech milieu (Fisher, 2010: 245; Wolf, 2003). The third corpus
      consists of articles published in the Harvard Business Review (HBR) between 1980 and
      2018. Again, after removing very short paragraphs, this resulted in a total of c.190,000
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                             99     
                                                             
       paragraphs. The purpose of this corpus is to check to what extent the spirit of digital capi-
       talism has already diffused into the mainstream of management literature and popular
       capitalist self-reflection – epitomized by the HBR (Schulz and Nicolai, 2015).
        To identify and trace normative references, we developed a comprehensive coding
       scheme through a reflexive process of theory-building and empirical validation in which
       the orders of worth were specified and disambiguated in multiple rounds of coding. Our
       units of analysis were paragraphs, as they can be seen as natural units of meaning; they
       often make ‘a point’ and are short enough to be relatively unambiguous and long enough
       to be informative. Paragraphs were assigned to a polity when they contained a clear and
       affirmative reference to one of the defining dimensions – and especially the central value
       – of a polity as laid out in Table 1 and further specified in the coding scheme (which we
       make available as a separate document). If paragraphs were purely descriptive or did not
       unambiguously refer to one polity, they were assigned to a residual category. Here are
       two examples of paragraphs that were coded as solution and market respectively:
        (1)‘We are investing in driverless technology [. . .], why? Well a million people a year die in
        cars, and how many more millions get injured, it’s just needless, right, and how much time, how
        much worse are our lives because we’re sitting there with a steering wheel [. . .] [But] when
        you can give people their time back, and when you run these cars more efficiently and there’s
        no more traffic, this is magic.’                     
        (2) ‘We are thinking in terms of purely commercial, business relations. Neither “friendship” nor
        “international cooperation” can be an excuse for not making a profit. These new ventures are
        very important strategically for us.’                
       Since our dataset contains several hundred thousand paragraphs, we used a super-
       vised learning approach to estimate category proportions for the corpora based on a
       set of hand-coded paragraphs. This requires (i) ensuring intercoder reliability for the
       1,518 hand-coded paragraphs, (ii) inferring category proportions in the unlabeled
       documents, which we did using a method of automated nonparametric content analy-
       sis (Hopkins and King, 2010; Jerzak et al., 2022), and (iii) validating the supervised
       learning model. For reasons of space, we detail these three steps and why each of
       them gives us confidence in our findings in online Appendices B1 to B3 and C.3
                                                             
       The Rise of the Spirit of Digital Capitalism          
       So far, we have developed our paper in three steps. First, we reconstructed the concept of
       the capitalist spirit and have operationalized it as the historically evolving combination
       of different ‘orders of worth’ that each provide different criteria for what is good, just,
       and fair. Second, we introduced the solutionist order of worth in which value derives
       from solving social problems with technological means. Third, we proposed an approach
       to identifying and tracing different normative claims in three text corpora that respec-
       tively focus on digital elites, the wider digital milieu, and capitalist discourse at large. We
       now turn to presenting our findings, and then discuss their significance in light of illus-
       trative observations and the secondary literature.    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      100                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
        A first finding concerns the professed normative beliefs of digital elites themselves.
      Figure 1 shows which normative ideas – operationalized as orders of worth – these elites
      most often refer to in their public speeches and interviews. It clearly shows that solution-
      ist ideas are a central normative reference point for digital elites. Around a quarter of
      normative references digital elites make are about the ability of technology to address
      central problems humanity faces. In addition, normative references that express a faith in
      the blessings of the market and the value of efficiency are also very common. References
      to green polity, by contrast, are remarkably absent. This, however, is not entirely surpris-
      ing. Reminiscent of older discussion on applying knowledge and engineering to manag-
      ing the environment in the Anthropocene (e.g. Crutzen and Stoermer, 2000: 485), Silicon
      Valley’s emerging ‘green brand of capitalism’ (Bialy et al., 2022) views ecological prob-
      lems largely through the normative lens of solutionism. That is, it views them as prob-
      lems to be solved with technology, rather than through a stronger emphasis on the green
      polity’s values of sustainability and sufficiency. Overall, these findings chime well not
      just with what we might expect, but also with other quantitative and qualitative research
      on tech elites.                                        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 1. References to different polities in statements by digital elites.
                                                             
        First, a survey of tech entrepreneurs from 2017 shows that while they have cultur-
      ally progressive, cosmopolitan, even socially redistributive attitudes, they strongly
      oppose government regulations and public services (Broockman et al., 2019). Digital
      elites are more concerned about social problems than other business elites, but they
      don’t think that addressing them should just or primarily be the government’s respon-
      sibility. Instead, they trust the invisible hand of the market steered by the helping hand
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            101     
                                                             
       of solutionist businesses. Hence there is no need for regulators to meddle with the
       world-improving endeavors of digital companies. Second, a quantitative analysis of
       tweets and philanthropic documents of digital elites also finds that they have a dis-
       tinct mindset that distinguishes them not only from the general population but also
       from other wealthy elites – a mindset that is particularly ‘meritocratic’ and ‘mission-
       driven’ (Brockmann et al., 2021).                     
        Third, detailed qualitative analyses that focus on Facebook specifically have also
       found that Mark Zuckerberg displays an almost ‘prophetic ethos [when trying to]
       persuade the public about Facebook’s vision for the future of sociality’ (Hoffmann
       et al., 2018: 214); and that Facebook strategically constructs a ‘corporate future imag-
       inary’ (Haupt, 2021: 239) in which Facebook itself plays a crucial infrastructural role
       in connecting the ‘global community’. In doing so, it uses a solutionist ‘corporate
       prophesy’ (Haupt, 2021: 254) to make itself appear essential in bringing about a ‘bet-
       ter world’. We also find many references to the solutionist – in addition to the civic
       and project-based – polity in an additional analysis of Zuckerberg’s public utterances
       (compiled in the ‘Zuckerberg Files’). This further corroborates the centrality of solu-
       tionism to how digital elites publicly talk about their values and ambitions (see online
       Appendix D).                                          
        Given the central roles of these ‘celebrity tech founders and their networks of power’
       (Little and Winch, 2021) in contemporary economies and societies, understanding the
       beliefs they hold – or even profess to hold – is crucial to understanding the course and
       character of digital capitalism more broadly. For example, through the role in shaping the
       moral and ideational background of political debates (cf. Abend, 2014), solutionist
       beliefs can help us understand the discursive politics of economic policymaking in the
       digital age, namely why the Silicon Valley model had such outsized influence on policy-
       makers’ expectations about future growth and how it can help performatively create and
       sustain hegemonic social blocs (Rothstein, 2021). Likewise, solutionist beliefs are a
       ‘constitutive element’ of a ‘scalability zeitgeist’ that increasingly permeates public pol-
       icy thinking and its newfound interest in ‘mission-oriented innovation’ or experimental
       ‘living labs’ (Pfotenhauer et al., 2022: 3, 6).       
        A second finding concerns the questions of whether solutionist beliefs have spread
       beyond the exclusive circle of digital elites and affected the wider digital milieu.
       Figure 2 depicts the evolving importance of different orders of worth in Wired, widely
       considered ‘the mouthpiece of the digital revolution’ (Wolf, 2003: 52). First, we find
       many references to the values of non-conformity, authenticity, flexibility, and anti-
       regulationism of the inspiration, market and partly also project polity – especially in
       the 1990s. But we also find significant references to the solutionist polity which,
       while lower than in the statements by digital elites themselves, increase after the
       bursting of the dot.com bubble and again after the financial crisis, just when the mar-
       ket and the project-based polity lose importance.     
        This chimes well with the argument about the triangular relationship between capi-
       talism, its spirit, and its critics (Chiapello, 2013). After all, the idea that the purpose of
       business is not just to make profits but to solve social problems is
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      102                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 2. References to different polities in Wired (1993–2019).
                                                             
      a powerful counterpoint to social critics who decry the moral parochialism of the
      shareholder-value doctrine and the self-referential and crisis-prone nature of financial
      capitalism (Kazmi et al., 2016: 749).4 Thus, at a time when capitalism was increasingly
      criticized for producing private but not public wealth and for creating rather than solv-
      ing social problems, solutionism lent legitimacy to entrepreneurs who promised to
      harness the power of technology for the common good. The new spirit of capitalism
      had incorporated the artistic critique of managerial capitalism as overly hierarchical
      and bureaucratic by singing the praises of flat hierarchies, de-centralization, flexibility,
      and self-reliance – all highly congenial to the demands of a postindustrial economy.
      Similarly, the spirit of digital capitalism responds to the charge of selfishness and lack
      of concern for the common good by highlighting the ability of digital companies to
      solve social problems. This return of social critique can also be seen in the ‘post-neo-
      liberal subjectivity’ of tech workers, namely their desire for being ‘middle-class
      wealthy and morally worthy’ (Dorschel, 2022: 1303), although many of them are more
      critical of naïve forms of solutionism.                
        This suggests that starting in the early 2000s, we have seen a shift in the dominant
      technology discourse, which is ‘inextricably linked’ (Fisher, 2010: 243) to the capitalist
      spirit itself. For example, whereas Fordist technology discourse had extolled the ability
      of technology to mitigate the exploitative aspects of capitalism (instability, insecurity,
      inequality), post-Fordist technology discourse promised to overcome ‘the alienating
      components of capitalism’ while downplaying ‘its exploitative components’ (Fisher,
      2010: 235). Indeed, many have argued that the internet has amplified the appeal and
      reach of the new spirit of capitalism, with a ‘spirit of networks’ (Fisher, 2010: 243) mak-
      ing ‘the network a normative model’ (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007: xxii) and serving
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            103     
                                                             
       as the ‘ethical foundation of the network enterprise’ (Castells, 2010: 214). Drawing on a
       long history of cybernetic and countercultural ideas, the digital entrepreneurs of the late
       20th century believed that the internet would help them do
        what the New Communalists had failed to accomplish: [. . .] tear down hierarchies, undermine
        the sorts of corporations and governments that had spawned them, and, in the hierarchies’
        place, create a peer-to-peer, collaborative society, interlinked by invisible currents of energy
        and information. (Turner, 2006: 209)                 
                                                             
       By joining ‘the cultural legitimacy of the counterculture to the technological and eco-
       nomic legitimacy of the computer industry’ (Turner, 2006, 219), these cybercultural
       apostles not only legitimized a hands-off approach to internet regulation. They also artic-
       ulated a broader vision of a society – the Californian ideology (Barbrook and Cameron,
       1996) – in which digital technologies would ‘marry the competitive demands of business
       with the desire for personal satisfaction and democratic participation’, achieving ‘pro-
       ductive coordination without top-down control’ (Taylor, 1994). The internet promised an
       escape from the iron cage of Fordism; it ‘became both a metaphor for [a post-Fordist
       society] and a means to bring it into being’ (Turner, 2006: 219).
        But today’s ‘newest’ spirit of capitalism, as we have seen, reacts not so much to the
       artistic critique of the alienating aspects of capitalism as to the social critique of capital-
       ism’s lack of solidarity and concern for the common good: it promises not to ‘flatten
       organizations, globalize society, decentralize control, and help harmonize people’
       (Nicholas Negroponte quoted in Turner, 2006: 1) but solve society’s problems root and
       branch, from traffic deaths to death itself. Moreover, it arises in a technological and polit-
       ico-economic environment characterized not by personal computers and the internet, with
       its decentralizing tendencies, but by the centralizing and scalable dynamics of platforms,
       big data and artificial intelligence (Pfotenhauer et al., 2022; Seidl, 2023). This is not to say
       that the values of the new spirit of capitalism are absent from the more recent technology
       discourse. For example, the values of engagement, sharing, and horizontality have recently
       diffused from the office space of the cadres into the social factory of the Web 2.0, promis-
       ing digital laborers in symbolic rewards what they lack in material compensation
       (Yeritsian, 2018). But, due to changes in dominant forms of critique and technologies, we
       see a new emphasis on solutionist ideas and the ability of even large technology platforms
       to solve social problems ‘at scale’ (Pfotenhauer et al., 2022). It is this new emphasis on
       and centrality of solutionist ideas that defines the spirit of digital capitalism and distin-
       guishes it from the more network-centered ‘new’ spirit of capitalism.
        However, have solutionist ideas become influential beyond tech elites and the wider
       tech milieu and begun to characterize capitalist discourse at large? Our third finding is that
       this is not yet the case. Figure 3 depicts references to the different orders of worth in the
       Harvard Business Review – perhaps the central venue for capitalist self-reflection and a
       leading outlet of management discourse (Schulz and Nicolai, 2015). Unsurprisingly, we
       find that the values of the industrial and market polity play a prominent role in a magazine
       that is centrally concerned with the efficiency of organizations and the functioning of mar-
       kets. Unlike in Wired, however, the projective polity becomes a lot more important in the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      104                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Figure 3. References to different polities in Harvard Business Review (1980–2022).
                                                             
                                                             
      1990s while the civic and industrial polities lose ground. This strongly confirms Boltanski
      and Chiapello’s argument that the values of the flexibility and agility have partly replaced
      the values of technical efficiency and planning, which had their heyday in the age of
      Fordism. We therefore confirm that from the 1980s onward, the spirit of capitalism – as
      expressed in management discourse (which Boltanski and Chiapello based their analysis
      on) – has recentered around of the values of projective polity.
        However, references to the solutionist order of worth remain marginal. For now, the
      new spirit of capitalism thus remains the dominant configuration of normative principles
      that justify capitalist action at large. Two developments might serve as a bridgehead for
      solutionist ideas to enter more mainstream management debates. First, there is a growing
      corporate social responsibility discourse that makes ‘the business case’ for social respon-
      sibility and advances a win-win narrative in which business and social goals are depicted
      as compatible or even complementary (Brandtner and Bromley, 2022). Second, there is
      an emerging debate among business scholars that businesses should go beyond the nar-
      row fixation on maximizing shareholder value and instead (re-)focus on ‘producing prof-
      itable solutions to problems of people and planet’ (Mayer, 2018: 12). Even the Business
      Roundtable has recently moved away from the idea that the sole purpose of business is
      to increase shareholder value; instead, it encouraged companies to also invest in their
      employees, protect the environment and deal fairly with their suppliers.
      The Legitimating, Motivating, and Orienting Role of the
      Spirit of Digital Capitalism                           
      Our findings add important insights to the literature on the beliefs of digital elites and the
      broader cultural underpinnings of digital capitalism. However, we have not discussed
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            105     
                                                             
       how solutionist ideas actually influence the trajectory of digital capitalism. While not the
       primary focus of this paper, we want to briefly illustrate how solutionist ideas can have
       legitimizing, motivating, and orienting effects – regardless of whether or not solutionist
       beliefs are held disingenuously.5                     
        First, solutionist ideas can influence how the public and policymakers perceive digital
       companies. Securing their legitimacy is ‘a matter of [both] survival [and] reputation’ for
       companies (Kazmi et al., 2016: 753) and actively curating their public image is therefore
       essential to successfully managing the ‘non-market environment’ (Bach and Blake,
       2016). We argue that the spirit of capitalism can amplify the effectiveness of such legiti-
       macy-seeking strategies by shaping the ‘moral background’ (Abend, 2014) of public and
       political debates on capitalism (cf. Rothstein, 2021). For example, solutionism can help
       justify ideas as radical as Larry Page’s view that ‘[o]ld institutions like the law . . . aren’t
       keeping up with the rate of change that we’ve caused through technology’ and only ham-
       per Google’s ability to ‘build really great things’ (quoted in Zuboff, 2019: 105). Much
       like the claim that ‘lawlessness is the necessary context for “technological innovation”’
       (Zuboff, 2019: 104), solutionist ideas have also lent moral and cognitive plausibility to
       the promise of the Silicon Valley model that ‘serving tech’s and VC’s interests drives
       economic growth’ and thus profoundly shaped economic policymaking across advanced
       capitalist democracies (Rothstein, 2021: 7).          
        Second, their solutionist credentials helped tech companies convince their workers
       that their values and those of the company are aligned. Capitalism faces a perennial
       ‘deficit of motivation’ (Kazmi et al., 2016: 744). And while they can use the stick of
       deprivation and the carrot of money, there are limits to coercive and economic methods
       of ensuring compliance.                               
        Workers have so many opportunities to take advantage of employers that it is not wise to
        depend on coercion and financial incentives alone as motivators. Employers want workers to
        operate autonomously, show initiative, use their imagination, and take on extra tasks not
        required by management; workers who are scared or dejected do not do these things. (Bewley,
        1999: 431)                                           
       Companies are thus incentivized to employ methods of normative compliance which
       instill identification with the company based on shared values and symbolic rewards
       (Etzioni, 1975). We argue that by drawing on (and often appropriating) normatively
       appealing ideas, the spirit of capitalism can help companies create normative compliance
       and attraction. This can be especially important when work is complex and workers in
       high demand, as is true for digital companies. Reporting, for example, has shown that
       tech workers care about the ‘mission of the company and what the companies are trying
       to achieve’, which is why Facebook had an increasingly difficult time recruiting talent
       ‘as the social stigma of working for Facebook began outweighing the financial benefits’
       (Bowles, 2018). A recent study also found that for college-degree jobs, invoking a proso-
       cial mission allows companies to pay workers less, suggesting that values might be a
       partial motivational substitute for money (Wilmers and Zhang, 2022).
        Conversely, companies will suffer resistance if workers notice that solutionist com-
       mitments are disregarded. This became evident during the recent wave of tech worker
       protests. As one Googler noted, ‘we stood up because [. . .] we believe a strong ethical
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      framework that values human life and safety is inseparable from positive technological
      progress [. . .] Before the [protests], a lot of Googlers had never considered the fact that
      their values might not be aligned with the values of leadership’ (Tarnoff, 2018). Thus,
      solutionist sermons are not just cheap talk but can powerfully motivate workers while
      also imposing real limitations on what companies can do without facing resistance (for
      the case of Google’s ‘Don’t be evil’, see Tiku, 2019). 
        Third, even if what digital elites publicly profess is not what they privately feel, solu-
      tionist ideas might still guide their profit-seeking activities by pointing them towards
      certain problems and away from others. Moral ideas, after all, have been shown to affect
      rational economic decision-making by offering plausible and appealing strategic goals in
      the face of uncertainty (Schröder, 2013). For example, when Mark Zuckerberg was urged
      to sell Facebook to Yahoo in 2006, he refused, arguing that he shared the ‘really deep
      belief that when companies are executing well on their vision they can have a much big-
      ger effect on the world than people think, not just as a business but as a steward of
      humanity’ (Friend, 2015). Here, the idea that Facebook could be a ‘steward of humanity’
      helped Zuckerberg make a decision laden with much uncertainty; Zuckerberg would
      have arguably decided differently were he only in it for the money. Similarly, John Doerr
      uses the missionaries-not-mercenaries heuristic to describe venture capital, and Google’s
      solutionist ambition to ‘organize the world’s information’ led it to build products long
      before they became profitable (such as Google Maps, which was released before the
      smartphone revolution).                                
      Conclusion                                             
      In this article, we have revisited and revised the concept of the capitalist spirit. We have
      shown how a new, solutionist spirit of digital capitalism has formed in which the idea
      that there is a profitable technological solution to every social problem takes center
      stage. We have also shown that while this spirit shapes the normative discourse of digital
      elites and the wider digital milieu, it does not yet define capitalist discourse at large.
      Here, as our findings confirm, Boltanski and Chiapello’s new spirit of capitalism is still
      dominant. If digitalization continues apace, this may of course change, with solutionist
      ideas spreading beyond their cultural crucible in Silicon Valley. We caution, however,
      against understanding the diffusion of solutionist ideas all too simplistically. Rather, we
      expect complex dynamics of culturally and institutionally mediated translation as solu-
      tionist ideas are taken up by non-US tech elites and companies (cf. Rothstein, 2021: 19);
      of selective appropriation as tech workers navigate their desire to be both ‘middle-class
      wealthy and morally worthy’ while keeping a critical distance from the naïve solutionism
      of their bosses (Dorschel, 2022: 1303); and even in the ambiguous embrace by many
      policymakers of ‘mission-oriented’ policies in response to ‘grand societal challenges’ –
      policies that, despite their critical credentials, cannot help but smack of solutionism
      (Pfotenhauer et al., 2022).                            
        But what about digital capitalism’s recent legitimation crisis? Aren’t the tech giants,
      long heralded as agents of capitalist rejuvenation and societal progress, increasingly
      seen as the BAADD guys: ‘big, anti-competitive, addictive and destructive to
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            107     
                                                             
       democracy’ (The Economist, 2018)? While this ‘techlash’ is real and by no means over,
       we warn against writing off solutionism too early. For one, digital companies have
       developed a kind of second-order solutionism where they promise technological solu-
       tions to problems that their own technologies have created. Co-opting the criticism that
       they have hijacked people’s minds with their addictive and distracting technologies,
       tech companies have developed technological fixes to these primary technological and
       business defects, such as apps that help users understand their habits and nudge them
       towards more healthy ones. In the case of Facebook’s ‘Time Well Spent’ initiative, they
       even co-opted the slogan of their most prominent critics at the Center for Humane
       Technology. This proactive and soft appropriation of ‘tech-humanist’ ideas ‘may pro-
       vide Silicon Valley with a way to protect that power from a growing public backlash –
       and even deepen it by uncovering new opportunities for profit-making’ (Tarnoff and
       Weigel, 2018).                                        
        Second, digital companies have aggressively used solutionist rhetoric to legitimize
       their move into new areas like health care, education, or climate change. Even before the
       pandemic, Google and Apple promised to use their technological prowess to ‘transform
       health care’, ‘improve outcomes’ and ‘save lives’. With the pandemic, they have teamed
       up ‘to harness the power of technology’ to help countries combat the pandemic more
       effectively, while Facebook wants to help use humanity’s ‘new superpower’ to fight the
       pandemic: ‘the ability to gather and share data for good’. The pandemic has thus acceler-
       ated digital companies’ move into semi-public sectors and recharged or supercharged
       their solutionist credentials.                        
        Moreover, new technologies such as artificial intelligence or quantum computing
       have reinvigorated solutionist beliefs. For example, Microsoft’s head of quantum com-
       puting wants ‘to solve some of the world’s hardest challenges with the quantum machine’.
       She argues that only ‘quantum computing will enable us to solve [. . .] the challenges
       facing humanity’ today; challenges such as climate change or sustainable food produc-
       tion (Svore, 2023). Similarly, Thomas Friedman speaks of a ‘New Promethean Moment’
       in the context of recent advances in artificial intelligence, arguing that the ‘potential to
       use these tools to solve seemingly impossible problems – from human biology to fusion
       energy to climate change – is awe-inspiring’ (Friedman, 2023). Perhaps not unsurpris-
       ingly, then, the newest generation of tech elites around OpenAI’s Sam Altman continues
       to be ‘resolutely upbeat’ and convinced ‘that with money and brains they can reboot
       social progress’ (The Economist, 2022).               
        Understanding solutionism better – including through more detailed qualitative and
       quantitative analyses of their effects – thus remains crucial to understanding a world in
       which ‘the solutionist toolkit [becomes] the default option for addressing all our existen-
       tial problems – from inequality to climate change’ (Morozov, 2020; see also Bialy et al.,
       2022).                                                
       Acknowledgements                                      
       We would like to thank Johannes Truffer, Kemal Yüksel, Jacqueline Kalbermatter, Joshua Klein,
       Gerhard Lauer, Nicole Philipp-Jahnke, and Matthias Zaugg for their incredible help during various
       stages of this research project. Without them, this paper would not have been possible.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      Funding                                                
      The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/
      or publication of this article: Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der Wissenschaftlichen
      Forschung (Grant number: 183066)                       
      ORCID iDs                                              
                                                             
      Oliver Nachtwey https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6246-1692  
      Timo Seidl https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6895-7114       
      Supplemental Material                                  
      Supplemental material for this article is available online.
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. We are aware that our focus here is on American tech elites, companies, and discourses.
        However, we explicitly encourage research on national or regional varieties of spirits of
        digital capitalism (e.g. on Chinese digital elites). Likewise, while we focus on digital elites
        and tech companies, our perspective should be complemented by research on tech workers
        (Dorschel, 2022) and non-tech companies as they increasingly deploy and come to rely on
        digital technologies.                                
      2. The term ‘ethic of solutionism’ is of course a nod to Weber’s Protestant ethic, but it is
        also meant to denote that solutionism is not merely a set of abstract ideas but can become,
        in Weber’s own words, ‘an ethically coloured maxim for the conduct of life’ (Weber,
        2007: 17).                                           
      3. We provide a replication file and replication data for all analysis.
      4. We see a similar development in the rise of win-win ideology in corporate social responsibil-
        ity discourse, which coincided with and in a way compensates for the emergence of neoliber-
        alism (Brandtner and Bromley, 2022).                 
      5. Based on reading countless documents and our own interviews with tech workers in Europe
        and California, digital elites strike us as deceiving themselves as much as others. In our view,
        solutionism might be bullshit, but most of its proponents are not, in Harry G. Frankfurt’s
        sense, bullshitting. It is of course easy to satirize solutionist beliefs, as HBO’s Silicon Valley
        has done so brilliantly. But as many inside-stories and anecdotes illustrate, most solutionists
        really do seem to believe in their lofty rhetoric. Ironically, Google’s Astro Teller left a meeting
        with Silicon Valley’s producers in a huff, angrily telling them that ‘We don’t do stupid things
        here [at GoogleX]. We do things that actually are going to change the world, whether you
        choose to make fun of that or not’ (Marantz, 2016). This does not strike us as the reaction of
        an insincere person.                                 
      References                                             
      Abend, Gabriel (2014) The Moral Background: An Inquiry into the History of Business Ethics.
        Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.           
      Bach, David and Blake, Daniel J. (2016) Frame or get framed: The critical role of issue framing in
        nonmarket management. California Management Review 58(3): 66–87.
      Barbrook, Richard and Cameron, Andy (1996) The Californian ideology. Science as Culture 6(1):
        44–72.                                               
      Bewley, Truman F. (1999) Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.                                    

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            109     
                                                             
       Bialy, Filip, Neff, Gina and Rone, Julia (2022) Silicon Valley’s brand of Green capitalism.
         Unpublished manuscript (available on request from authors).
       Boltanski, Luc and Chiapello, Eve (2007) The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
       Boltanski, Luc and Thévenot, Laurent (2006) On Justification: Economies of Worth. Princeton,
         NJ: Princeton University Press.                     
       Bowles, Nellie (2018) ‘I don’t really want to work for Facebook’. So say some computer science
         students. Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/15/technology/jobs-facebook-
         computer-science-students.html (accessed 25 September 2023).
       Brandtner, Christof and Bromley, Patricia (2022) Neoliberal governance, evaluations, and the
         rise of win–win ideology in corporate responsibility discourse, 1960–2010. Socio-Economic
         Review 20(4): 1933–1960.                            
       Brockmann, Hilke, Drews, Wiebke and Torpey, John (2021) A class for itself? On the worldviews
         of the new tech elite. PLoS One 16(1): 0244071.     
       Broockman, David E., Ferenstein, Gregory and Malhotra, Neil (2019) Predispositions and the
         political behavior of American economic elites: Evidence from technology entrepreneurs.
         American Journal of Political Science 63(1): 212–233.
       Busemeyer, Marius R., Kemmerling, Achim and van Kersbergen, Kees, et al. (eds) (2022)
         Digitalization and the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Campbell, Colin (2018) The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism, new extended
         edn. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.         
       Castells, Manuel (2010) The Rise of the Network Society: The Information Age: Economy, Society,
         and Culture, Volume I. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. 
       Chiapello, Eve (2013) Capitalism and its criticisms. In: du Gay, Paul, and Morgan, Glenn (eds)
         New Spirits of Capitalism?: Crises, Justifications, and Dynamics. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press, pp. 60–81.                                   
       Crutzen, Paul J. and Stoermer, Eugene F. (2000) The Anthropocene. How can we live in a world
         where there is no nature without people? In: Robin, Libby, Sörlin, Sverker, and Warde, Paul
         (eds) The Future of Nature. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, pp. 483–485.
       Culpepper, Pepper D. and Thelen, Kathleen (2019) Are we all Amazon primed? Consumers and
         the politics of platform power. Comparative Political Studies 17: 1–31.
       Daub, Adrian (2020) What Tech Calls Thinking: An Inquiry into the Intellectual Bedrock of Silicon
         Valley. FSG Originals x Logic. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
       Davis, Gerald F. and Sinha, Aseem (2021) Varieties of Uberization: How technology and institu-
         tions change the organization(s) of late capitalism. Organization Theory 2(1): 1–17.
       Denning, Peter J. and Tedre, Matti (2019) Computational Thinking. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
       Diaz-Bone, Rainer and Salais, Robert (2011) Economics of convention and the history of econo-
         mies: Towards a transdisciplinary approach in economic history. Historical Social Research
         36(4): 7–39.                                        
       Dorschel, Robert (2022) A new middle-class fraction with a distinct subjectivity: Tech workers
         and the transformation of the entrepreneurial self. The Sociological Review 70(6): 1302–1320.
       du Gay, Paul and Morgan, Glenn (2013) Understanding capitalism: Crises, legitimacy, and change
         through the prism of the new spirit of capitalism. In: du Gay, Paul, and Morgan, Glenn (eds)
         New Spirits of Capitalism?: Crises, Justifications, and Dynamics. Oxford: Oxford University
         Press, pp. 1–39.                                    
       Etzioni, Amitai (1975) A Comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations: On Power, Involvement,
         and Their Correlates. Rev. and enl., edn. New York, NY: Free Press.
       Fisher, Eran (2010) Contemporary technology discourse and the legitimation of capitalism.
         European Journal of Social Theory 13(2): 229–252.   
       Frey, Carl Benedikt (2019) The Technology Trap: Capital, Labor, and Power in the Age of
         Automation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      110                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      Friedman, Thomas L. (2023) Our new Promethean moment. Available at: https://www.nytimes.
        com/2023/03/21/opinion/artificial-intelligence-chatgpt.html (accessed 25 September 2023).
      Friend, Tad (2015) Who funds the future? Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/maga-
        zine/2015/05/18/tomorrows-advance-man (accessed 25 September 2023).
      Gallego, Aina and Kurer, Thomas (2022) Automation, digitalization, and artificial intelligence in
        the workplace: Implications for political behavior. Annual Review of Political Science 25(1)
        463–484.                                             
      Giridharadas, Anand (2018) Winners Take All: The Elite Charade of Changing the World. New
        York, NY: Knopf.                                     
      Hassel, Anke and Palier, Bruno (eds) (2020) Growth and Welfare in Advanced Capitalist
        Economies: How Have Growth Regimes Evolved? Oxford University Press. Available at:
        https://oxford.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.1093/oso/9780198866176.001.0001/
        oso-9780198866176 (accessed 11 May 2022).            
      Haupt, Joachim (2021) Facebook futures: Mark Zuckerberg’s discursive construction of a better
        world. New Media & Society 23(2): 237–257.           
      Hoffmann, Anna Lauren, Proferes, Nicholas and Zimmer, Michael (2018) ‘Making the world
        more open and connected’: Mark Zuckerberg and the discursive construction of Facebook
        and its users. New Media & Society 20(1): 199–218.   
      Hopkins, Daniel J. and King, Gary (2010) A method of automated nonparametric content analysis
        for ssocial science. American Journal of Political Science 54(1): 229–247.
      Jerzak, Connor T., King, Gary and Strezhnev, Anton (2022) An improved method of automated
        nonparametric content analysis for social science. Political Analysis 31(1): 42–58.
      Johnston, Sean F. (2017) Technological parables and iconic illustrations: American technocracy
        and the rhetoric of the technological fix. History and Technology 33(2): 196–219.
      Kazmi, Bahar Ali, Leca, Bernard and Naccache, Philippe (2016) Is corporate social responsibility
        a new spirit of capitalism? Organization 23(5): 742–762.
      Lanier, Jaron (2017) Dawn of the New Everything: Encounters with Reality and Virtual Reality.
        New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company.                
      Little, Ben and Winch, Alison (2021) The New Patriarchs of Digital Capitalism. Abingdon:
        Routledge.                                           
      McGoey, Linsey (2012) Philanthrocapitalism and its critics. Poetics 40(2): 185–199.
      Marantz, Andrew (2016) How ‘Silicon Valley’ nails Silicon Valley. Available at: https://www.
        newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/how-silicon-valley-nails-silicon-valley (accessed 25
        September 2023).                                     
      Mayer, Colin P. (2018) Prosperity: Better Business Makes the Greater Good. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.                                    
      Morozov, Evgeny (2013) To Save Everything, Click Here: Technology, Solutionism and the Urge
        to Fix Problems That Don’t Exist. New York, NY: Public Affairs.
      Morozov, Evgeny (2020) The tech ‘solutions’ for coronavirus take the surveillance state to the
        next level. Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/15/tech-cor-
        onavirus-surveilance-state-digital-disrupt (accessed 25 September 2023).
      O’Toole, James (2019) The Enlightened Capitalists: Cautionary Tales of Business Pioneers Who
        Tried to Do Well by Doing Good. New York, NY: Harper Business.
      Pfotenhauer, Sebastian, Laurent, Brice and Papageorgiou, Kyriaki, et al. (2022) The politics of
        scaling. Social Studies of Science 52(1): 3–34.      
      Rahman, K. Sabeel and Thelen, Kathleen (2019) The rise of the platform business model and the
        transformation of twenty-first-century capitalism. Politics & Society 47(2): 177–204.
      Rothstein, Sidney A. (2021) Toward a discursive approach to growth models: Social blocs in the
        politics of digital transformation. Review of International Political Economy 29(4): 1211–
        1236.                                                

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nachtwey and Seidl                            111     
                                                             
       Schröder, Martin (2013) How moral arguments influence economic decisions and organizational
         legitimacy: The case of offshoring production. Organization 20(4): 551–576.
       Schulz, Ann-Christine and Nicolai, Alexander T. (2015) The intellectual link between manage-
         ment research and popularization media: A bibliometric analysis of the Harvard Business
         Review. Academy of Management Learning & Education 14(1): 31–49.
       Seidl, Timo (2023) Commodification and disruption: Theorizing digital capitalism. Weizenbaum
         Journal of the Digital Society 3(1). Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publi-
         cation/372498579_Commodification_and_Disruption_Theorizing_Digital_Capitalism
         (accessed 25 September 2023).                       
       Selling, Niels and Strimling, Pontus (2023) Liberal and anti-establishment: An exploration of
         the political ideologies of American tech workers. The Sociological Review. https://doi.
         org/10.1177/00380261231182522                       
       Serwer, Andy (2008) Larry Page on how to change the world. Available at: https://money
         .cnn.com/2008/04/29/magazines/fortune/larry_page_change_the_world.fortune/index.htm
         (accessed 25 September 2023).                       
       Slee, Tom (2016) What’s Yours Is Mine: Against the Sharing Economy. New York; London: OR
         Books.                                              
       Sombart, Werner (1902) Der Moderne Kapitalismus. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.
       Staab, Philipp (2019) Digitaler Kapitalismus. Markt Und Herrschaft in Der Ökonomie Der
         Unknappheit. Berlin: Suhrkamp.                      
       Stark, David (2009) The Sense of Dissonance: Accounts of Worth in Economic Life. Princeton, NJ:
         Princeton University Press.                         
       Stark, David and Pais, Ivana (2020) Algorithmic management in the platform economy. Sociologica
         14(3): 47–72.                                       
       Svore, Krysta (2023) The quantum revolution: The race to build a quantum computer. Available
         at: https://www.ft.com/content/f25038fd-a48f-4010-94a6-63e000ffae2d (accessed 25
         September 2023).                                    
       Tarnoff, Ben (2018) Tech workers versus the Pentagon: An interview with Kim. Available at:
         https://jacobinmag.com/2018/06/google-project-maven-military-tech-workers/ (accessed 25
         September 2023).                                    
       Tarnoff, Ben and Weigel, Moira (2018) Why Silicon Valley can’t fix itself. Available at: https://
         www.theguardian.com/news/2018/may/03/why-silicon-valley-cant-fix-itself-tech-humanism
         (accessed 25 September 2023).                       
       Taylor, Bill (1994) Control in the age of chaos. Available at: https://hbr.org/1994/11/control-in-
         an-age-of-chaos (accessed 25 September 2023).       
       The Economist (2018) How to tame the tech titans. Available at: https://www.economist.com/
         leaders/2018/01/18/how-to-tame-the-tech-titans (accessed 25 September 2023).
       Thelen, Kathleen (2018) Regulating Uber: The politics of the platform economy in Europe and the
         United States. Perspectives on Politics 16(4): 938–953.
       Thévenot, Laurent, Moody, Michael and Lafaye, Claudette (2000) Forms of valuing nature:
         Arguments and modes of justification in French and American environmental disputes. In:
         Lamont, Michèle and Thévenot, Laurent (eds) Rethinking Comparative Cultural Sociology:
         Repertoires of Evaluation in France and the United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press, pp. 229–272.                                 
       Thompson, Clive (2019) Coders: The Making of a New Tribe and the Remaking of the World. New
         York, NY: Penguin Press.                            
       Tiku, Nitasha (2019) Three years of misery inside Google, the happiest company in tech. Available
         at: https://www.wired.com/story/inside-google-three-years-misery-happiest-company-tech/
         (accessed 25 September 2023).                       

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      112                             Theory, Culture & Society 41(2)
                                                             
      Tirole, Jean (2021) Digital dystopia. American Economic Review 111(6): 2007–2048.
      Turner, Fred (2006) From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth
        Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
      Vallas, Steven and Schor, Juliet B. (2020) What do platforms do? Understanding the gig economy.
        Annual Review of Sociology 46(1): 273–294.           
      Weber, Max (1946) Religious rejections of the world and their directions. In: Gerth, Hans Heinrich
        Gerth, and Mills, Charles Wright Mills (eds) From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, trans.
        and ed. and with an intro by Hans Heinrich Gerth and Charles Wright Mills. New York, NY:
        Oxford University Press, pp. 323–359.                
      Weber, Max (2007) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. by Talcott Parsons,
        with an intro by Anthony Giddens. London: Routledge. 
      Weizenbaum, Joseph (1976) Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation.
        San Francisco, CA: Freeman.                          
      Wilmers, Nathan and Zhang, Letian (2022) Values and inequality: Prosocial jobs and the College
        Wage Premium. American Sociological Review 87(3): 415–442.
      Wolf, Gary (2003) Wired: A Romance. New York, NY: Random House.
      Yeritsian, Gary (2018) ‘Capitalism 2.0’: Web 2.0 manifestoes and the new spirit of capitalism.
        Critical Sociology 44(4–5): 703–717.                 
      Zuboff, Shoshana (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
        the New Frontier of Power. New York, NY: Public Affairs.
      Oliver Nachtwey is Professor of Sociology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. His research
      interests are processes of social modernization and individualization as well as the transformation
      of work. His research and work also explore the development of social conflicts, political represen-
      tation, protests and social movements. In 2024, Polity Press will publish his book Offended
      Freedom: Aspects of Libertarian Authoritarianism (with Carolin Amlinger). He is also the author
      of Germany’s Hidden Crisis: Social Decline in the Heart of Europe (Verso, 2018).
      Timo Seidl is a post-doc at the University of Vienna’s Centre for European Integration Research.
      He holds a PhD from the European University Institute with a thesis on the comparative political
      economy of digital capitalism. In his research, Timo looks at how ideas and institutions as well as
      politics and power shape the digital transformation of economies and societies, with a particular
      focus on the role of the European Union. You can find out more about Timo’s work at www.timo-
      seidl.com.                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             