[PAGE 1]
 1178472                                                     
 research-article2023 TCS0010.1177/02632764231178472Theory, Culture & SocietyOsborne and Rose
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Against Posthumanism:    Notes          2024, Vol. 41(1) 3 –21
                                              © The Author(s) 2023
       towards  an Ethopolitics of                           
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Personhood                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462432131117788447722
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Thomas Osborne                                        
       University of Bristol                                 
                                                             
       Nikolas Rose                                          
       Australian National University; University College London
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Are we humans destined to become ‘posthuman’? In this paper, we question the
       claims of posthumanism, accepting some of its broader insights whilst proposing a
       more empirically and ethically appropriate ‘vitalist’ response. We argue that despite
       recent changes in styles of thought that question the uniqueness of ‘the human’, and
       despite novel technological developments for augmenting human bodies, we remain
       – fundamentally – persons. Humans, as persons, are constitutively embedded in and
       scaffolded by the material, social, semantic and cultural niches they have constructed
       for themselves. An ‘ethopolitical’ response to our present that recognizes this fact not
       only requires us to engage with the consequences of making lives in the unequal niches
       that restrict and stunt the personhood of so many human beings at present, but also
       requires us to broaden the bandwidth of those who are recognized fully as persons. In
       our conclusion we briefly develop the theme that this emphasis on personhood can be
       seen as a vitalist – rather than a humanist – stance. 
       Keywords                                              
       ethics, ethopolitics, personhood, posthumanism, vitalism
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Have we become ‘posthuman’? Have we crossed some kind of a threshold, consigning
       both the idea of human uniqueness and the limits of the natural born human being
       to history? Should we embrace ‘posthumanism’ as the theoretical and ethical stance
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Thomas Osborne. Email: thomas.osborne@bristol.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                               Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      appropriate to our times? In this paper we argue that this way of posing the question of
      the human today forecloses crucial social, ethical and political debates, and that these
      debates are better framed in terms of the ethopolitics of personhood.
        Of course there are many versions of posthumanism in both the academic literature
      and the popular media, and it is beyond the scope of this paper to review them all (Hayles,
      1999; Herbrechter, 2013; Wolfe, 2009; Rosendahl et al., 2022). Nevertheless, for heuris-
      tic purposes, we can distinguish two main themes in the current debates.
        In one version, which we call ‘standpoint posthumanism’, the idea of the human
      embodies the premises of those who framed it: the norm against which humans have
      come to be judged is that of the male, white, heterosexual, European and so forth
      (Braidotti, 2013). Thus standpoint posthumanism argues that we must reject the ideas
      and values attached to the idea of ‘the human’ along with all the other binaries bequeathed
      to us by phallocentric Enlightenment rationality: human/animal; man/woman; born/
      made; white/black; reason/passion, etc. The very idea of the human, it is claimed, embod-
      ies deeply prejudicial hierarchies and should be subject to critique by theory, philosophy,
      and ethics in the name of a posthumanism that transcends such divisions. Central to this
      normative project should be the emerging field of the post-humanities: studies that no
      longer chart the doings and achievements of male, white humans but explore the consti-
      tutive entanglements between humans, animals, material and technological artefacts and
      other entities (Braidotti, 2018).                      
        In another version, the claim that we are becoming posthuman is not so much norma-
      tive as diagnostic. From this perspective, we have finally escaped the limits of our bio-
      logical bodies: we are becoming posthuman because of technological advances from
      genetic manipulation and brain-computer interfaces to neuroprosthetics and robotics
      (Halberstam and Livingston, 1995; Fukuyama, 2006; Mahon, 2017). We are no longer
      beings shaped by the long history of evolution; we have remade ourselves. From this
      perspective, we need to address the novel social, ethical and political challenges that
      these technological developments pose, whether these be limits on what is ethically or
      legally permissible, or the dilemmas of attributing responsibility to self-driving automo-
      biles or robots.                                       
        In this paper, we argue that both these versions, whilst capturing something impor-
      tant in our present, are framed in such a way as to foreclose crucial debates. Standpoint
      posthumanism captures the implicit sociopolitical assumptions in many of the ways that
      the distinction between human and non-human has been deployed historically. But it
      shuts down crucial ethopolitical debates about the values that should shape relations
      between diverse ways of being human persons in our global present. As for technologi-
      cal posthumanism, as theorists like Serres (2019) have argued, humans escaped the
      constraints of Darwinian evolution from the moment of emergence of our species (cf.
      Sterelny, 2012). It is true that some posthumanists recognize that humans have always
      been ‘more’ than human (Mahon, 2017; cf. Haraway, 2006) but this mis-poses the issue.
      In Clark’s (2003) resonant phrase, humans are ‘natural born cyborgs’ and have always
      augmented themselves with tools and scaffolded their forms of life with material, social,
      semantic and linguistic artefacts. Despite many technological advances, and the fash-
      ionable speculations of some popular science writers, the empirical reality is that the
      destiny of the vast majority of us, many millions of whose lives are constrained by the

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               5      
                                                             
       corporeal consequences of brutal material inequalities in access to infrastructure,1 is to
       remain human, all too human. Our bodies and souls may be decomposed into data
       points for algorithms or parameters for surveillance systems (Burrell and Fourcade,
       2021; Roussi, 2020), but we bear the cerebral and corporeal consequences of these new
       governmental regimes as vital organisms who, for the foreseeable future, are fated to
       age, to suffer and to die.                            
        This is not to deny that there are many changes in how some of us, at least in the
       Global North, understand our status as human beings, and what, given the resources
       necessary, humans are able to do to augment ourselves. But the claim that we have
       become posthuman evades the necessary empirical and historical debates in the social
       and human sciences about the many ways of being human in the past and the present and
       the highly differentiated sociopolitical implications of technological changes in the fore-
       seeable future. Any empirically grounded history, sociology and anthropology seems to
       be lost in such ways of thinking, as is any genuine political awareness of the forces shap-
       ing human lives in the multitude of different human inhabitations, and enabling or stunt-
       ing human capacities.                                 
        In short, each of these forms of posthumanism addresses a badly-formed problem;
       they are unable to give rise to a progressive conceptual and empirical research pro-
       gramme, still less a realistic politics. In this paper, we step aside from the language of
       ‘posthumanism’ to propose what we argue is a more empirically robust and ethically
       appropriate ‘vitalist’ response. Ours is an empirical vitalism that takes seriously ‘the
       pathic aspects of life – pathology, sickness, error; in short everything that makes us, as
       living beings, potentially weak, without power’ (Osborne, 2016: 185).
        Such vitalism broadens the bandwidth of what it is to be a fully human person and
       draws our attention to the historically and culturally variable extent to which all
       human beings are accorded social, political and legal recognition as persons; a matter
       that includes, but goes way beyond, the matter of rights. Rather than posthumanism,
       we suggest, what is required is an ethopolitical response to such challenges to person-
       hood in our present, that is to say, one that takes seriously the values and moral com-
       mitments that should inform our political and ethical responsibilities (Rose, 2007:
       27). A focus on the reality of the vital existence of human persons moves our attention
       away from the often arcane debates about posthumanism to the reality of our present,
       to an understanding of the complex vital infrastructure that has been, and is, required
       to sustain personhood, and to support and sustain the differing modalities of living
       human persons.                                        
        In the first part of this paper, we consider the claims about the posthuman we have
       outlined above and set out our objections to these in more detail. In the second part, we
       develop our argument that we should formulate our investigations, not in terms of the
       human, but in terms of the variety of ways of being a person; we suggest that we can
       learn something from studies of what we term ‘minority persons’ about the ways, beyond
       the posthuman, that we might go about understanding what Amanda Baggs terms ‘the
       many shades of persons’.2 Finally, we briefly address our approach to vitalism, arguing
       that it is necessary to recognize the specific pathos of being a finite human person strug-
       gling to make a life, and to create and sustain a milieu for that life, in an often hostile and
       unforgiving world.                                    

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                               Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Part One: A Badly Formed Problem                       
      The idea of ‘the human’ as the essence of a certain type of being has always been mis-
      leading. The evidence from neurobiology, cognitive science and evolution firmly sup-
      ports the view that human capabilities, mental and physical, have always been
      ‘transdermal’ in John Dewey’s terms (Dewey, 1958 [1925]). These are invoked with
      impressionistic verve by Serres (2019) when he argues that our exo-Darwinian status –
      inaugurated by the first tools, by ‘culture’ – has turned inward upon itself; in a world of
      extended technologies humanity has left Darwinism behind through novel technologies
      that do not just situate the body in extended networks but which actually transform that
      body and the person itself (pp. 40–41). These include what Serres (2019) describes as
      soft technologies, by which he means information technologies of various types (p. 176).
      These do not only extend the human outwards but fold into the human itself. With the
      mushrooming of information technologies, Serres (2019) suggests that we have ‘returned
      to evolution’, but perhaps this appears more Lamarckian than Darwinian as each genera-
      tion passes on what it has invented to the next (p. 48).
        Evolutionary and cognitive neurobiologists give empirical form to such arguments.
      As Clark (1997) argues, human capacities are not bounded by their ‘skinbag’ but extended
      by and embedded in the milieu that humans have carved out for themselves; as Sterelny
      (2008) puts it, they are ‘scaffolded’ by the material organization of the environment, the
      capacities for communication provided by language, and memory, and the semantic and
      symbolic worlds they enable, worlds not just embodied or embrained, but built into lan-
      guage and tradition and passed forward to each individual in the course of their develop-
      ment (Sprevak, 2019). Thus, as Hutchins (1995) showed so compellingly, cognition ‘in
      the wild’ is not a property of an isolated human brain but always distributed across and
      embedded in a complex milieu of tools, instruments, persons within a specific material
      environment. The distinctiveness of humans thus lies not only in the size and complexity
      of their neuronal equipment but also in their long apprenticeship in which language in
      action is taught anew to each generation, as are many other ‘natural’ human capacities
      such as control of urination and defecation, management of requirements for food and
      water, practices of mutual care and defence, especially of infants and other vulnerable
      conspecifics, and so forth, all embedded in historically and culturally shaped modes of
      individuation. Viewed from this perspective, the social history of humans in their differ-
      ent cultures – naming practices, the transmission of myths and legends, religious rituals
      and traditions, regimes of power and control, and indeed the very layout and architecture
      of human material niches – creates a further social scaffolding through which human
      animals become particular types of persons – with all their hierarchies and distinctions
      – at different times and places (Sterelny, 2021).      
        The ideas of 4E cognition – embodied, emplaced, extended and enacted cognition –
      may be recent and subject to internal debate and external criticisms (see Newen et al.,
      2018). But there is a much older body of scholarly research that has pointed to the way
      that language, writing, printing, and even such apparently simple practices as list mak-
      ing, have transformative cognitive consequences for humans (Goody, 1978; Latour,
      1986). But there is much more to being human than the capacity to use these cognitive
      skills. Contemporary humanness depends on an immensely complex but often barely
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               7      
                                                             
       visible infrastructure – from sewage systems and water supplies through networks of
       pipes and pipelines, the production and distribution of power through networks and
       grids, the development of national and international standards and regulatory regimes,
       the creation of global financial systems and much more, which extends way beyond any
       human life and structures, supports and constraints across human generations (see the
       articles collected in Collier et al., 2016).          
        Our scaffolding has certainly been transformed by recent technological develop-
       ments, but it has been similarly transformed innumerable times in our past. The thresh-
       old, if there ever was one, from human animal to human being, was passed millennia
       ago, and those who dream of a posthuman or transhuman future do so only by forgetting
       what has made us human in the first place. If we need reminding of the consequences of
       the absence of such scaffolding, we need only to consider what it takes to be human in
       the slums of Mumbai or Dhaka, or contemplate the tragic reduction of the possibilities
       for human life occurring as we write during the massive destruction of critical infrastruc-
       ture by the ‘inhuman’ Russian bombardment of Ukraine. 
       The Ethopolitics of Persons                           
       This is the approach that we label ‘ethopolitical’. It is not so much to do with ‘the human’
       but with persons, with the political, moral and conceptual schemas shaping who or what
       counts as a person at any time and place, and their consequences for the multiple ways of
       being persons at any one time and place (Rose, 2007: 22–7). Instead of invoking the
       binary terminology of the human versus the posthuman we insist on the multiplicity of
       modalities of personhood. Of course personhood is always a construct – but none the less
       real for all that. What or rather who does or does not qualify as a person is, and long has
       been, a political issue. Recall, for example, the well known facts that slaves were not
       counted as full persons in early US censuses (Finkelman, 2012); that in many jurisdic-
       tions women could not be fully persons at law until very recently; and that it has taken
       decades of political activism, including now the neurodiversity movement, to grant full
       person-ness to those deemed mad or intellectually differently abled. Perhaps it will be
       argued that this shows that the category of the person is no less difficult to pin down than
       that of the human – are we speaking of legal persons, of dramatic personae, and what, for
       example, is implied when people attribute some form of personhood to animals? But in
       all these cases, what is indeed involved are questions of value and values, and the politi-
       cal and ethical disputes around these. That is to say, these are ethopolitical issues, and the
       challenges raised in defining or delimiting personhood are unlikely to be resolved epis-
       temologically or even philosophically. Indeed, rather than suggesting that the category of
       the human should be superseded, we suggest it is more productive to explore how ideas
       as to what or who counts as a person have been transformed in different historical and
       geographical domains, and in arenas ranging from the medical to the geopolitical.
        The binary of human versus posthuman prematurely forecloses these investigations of
       the formation, maintenance and overturning of different modes of personhood, the scaf-
       foldings and affordances that have made such forms of personhood possible, and the
       value and values attached to the varieties of persons, historically and culturally, for
       instance in relation to rank, race, gender, age, or sensory impairments. These are not
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                               Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      merely socially ascribed statuses but entail very different material, corporeal and cere-
      bral modes of being. If we are to understand the mutations in our present that are bundled
      into the posthuman ‘turn’ then we will need to be realistic, in the sense of an attention to
      the ways in which our ways of thinking about, intervening upon and being human per-
      sons are changing in the light of research on human evolution, animal sentience, artificial
      intelligence and so forth and the specific questions of ethics and politics that these
      changes raise.                                         
        For example, we do not need to question human exceptionalism to recognize what is
      at stake in the campaigns of activists protesting against the cruel treatment of animals,
      whether it be the harsh violence of the slaughterhouse, the routinized violence of indus-
      trial food production, or even the constraining and moulding of animal biology in the
      everyday routines of the farmyard. Theirs is an idealistic but pragmatic ethopolitics, a
      rejection of practices that are cruel or hurtful to animals, based on the belief that they can
      feel pain and suffer, that is to say they have modes of sentience that should be recognized
      in particular ways. Those who wonder if robots equipped with artificial intelligence will
      develop sentience or consciousness do not suggest that this would make such entities
      human but that it would make them, at least in some respects, worthy of some of the
      rights and protections granted to persons, and also some of their ethical and legal obliga-
      tions. An ethopolitical perspective enables us to extend our concerns to non-human oth-
      ers that demonstrate sentience, and even grant them some of the protections hitherto
      reserved to certain types of persons, while still recognizing what evolutionary biology
      and historical sociology have shown us – that, as far as our own planet is concerned,
      while humans are not alone in their capacity for sentience, they are indeed a unique spe-
      cies, albeit one that is constitutively entangled in much wider webs of life and indeed in
      the transformation of the materiality of our planet itself.
      The Universal Human?                                   
      Whilst the hierarchies of raciology are all too familiar, we need no posthuman standpoint
      to underpin critical evaluations of these styles of thought and their consequences (e.g.
      Gould, 1981; Gilman, 1985). The movements towards universal human rights have been
      more ethopolitical than ontological, that is to say based on certain values and ideals
      about how a human person should be treated and directed against certain classes of harms
      that violate those beliefs. Take, for instance, three conventions: the charter of human
      rights, the idea of crimes against humanity and the convention on the rights of persons
      with disabilities. The UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted in 1948 does
      not make much mention of ‘the human’ but refers in its preamble, for example, to ‘inal-
      ienable rights of all members of the human family’ and to ‘the dignity and worth of the
      human person’ and later refers throughout simply to ‘everyone’.3 The 11 categories of
      offences that are considered ‘crimes against humanity’ in the 1998 Rome Statute estab-
      lishing the International Criminal Court refer to offences against civilian populations and
      persons, but not to any universal category of humans. It needs no ontological account of
      the human to define such crimes, and the history of the concept shows its pragmatic,
      ethopolitical status; the category of ‘crimes against humanity’ emerged because there
      was need for a notion that encapsulated genocidal behaviour beyond the ‘laws of war’ – a
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               9      
                                                             
       crime against humanity is thus pragmatically distinguished from a ‘war crime’ (Jia,
       1999; Osborne, 2003). The 2006 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with
       Disabilities refers throughout, as the title suggests, not to ‘human rights’ but to ‘persons
       with disabilities’.4 And while the politics of enforcement of these instruments and decla-
       rations is highly unequal, there is not much sign here of an underlying conception of the
       human as male, white, fully abled, heterosexual or any of the other attributes that some
       posthumanists believe is invoked by the term – indeed quite the reverse, the history of
       these endeavours shows very clearly the repeated attempts to extend their concerns to all
       persons.                                              
        Such conventions function as part of what Judith Shklar termed ‘the liberalism of
       fear’ (Shklar, 1989), a set of beliefs about the equal worth of all persons, and instrumen-
       tally as one weapon, albeit limited, against cruelty and fear. Bernard Williams has called
       this a ‘negative universalism’, and the idea of all human persons as forming one family
       certainly has a place in such ethopolitical debates (Williams, 2005). Similarly, for a
       writer such as Gilroy (2001), a vision of a cosmopolitan ‘planetary humanism’ is not
       based in ontology but is a strategy for combatting the many varieties of fascism and
       raciology. It is, in our terms, an ethopolitical move, an ethical strategy to give shape to
       urgent demands in the politics of our present.        
       Uneasy Cyborgs                                        
       What, then, of claims that, even if we humans are only such because of our augmenta-
       tions and scaffolds, recent technological developments, in artificial intelligence, robot-
       ics, prosthetics, brain-computer implants or brain-machine interfaces and the like, do
       mark a threshold, freeing us from the skinbags of our body, with its ailments and inescap-
       able ageing, liberating our minds from those limited capacities bequeathed to us by the
       aleatory work of evolution? For some who think this way, age will be conquered by
       genetic engineering, babies will be born in artificial environments engineered to maxi-
       mize their capacities, ailments will be all but eliminated as genomes will be edited at
       birth if not before to ensure longevity and eliminate the defects that lead to disease,
       humans will have chips implanted into their brains, using wireless technologies, not just
       to control prosthetic limbs but also to enhance their sensory capacities and manipulate
       distant robotic entities via the internet (e.g. Lee, 2019; Bohan, 2022). Yet one needs to be
       realistic about the limits of these augmentations. Our AIs can win at chess but have no
       idea what the game means to those who play it, our self-driving cars prove all too prone
       to ‘accidents’, Google strongly denies that its advanced language recognition and
       response system LaMDA has given rise to sentience,5 and even though our sex aids and
       robot companions have got fancier since ancient times, as COVID isolation has shown
       us, we still yearn for the touch, taste and smell of another human body, and can die of
       loneliness (Cacioppo and Patrick, 2008). As for augmenting our bodies and brains, a
       growing literature has shown that it is not necessarily so easy to live with ones prostheses
       (e.g. Davies and Dattta, 2003) and the use of brain/computer interfaces requires exten-
       sive training and is exhausting for the user over any long period (Olaronke et al., 2018).
       Many who have electrodes implanted for deep brain stimulation to modulate mobility
       problems cause by Parkinson’s, and now to ‘treat’ depression, ask for them to be turned
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      off as they dislike the effects they have on their own sense of personhood (Bluhm et al.,
      2020; Dubiel, 2009). While some dream of uploading human brains into silicon entities,
      our understanding of the neural circuitry of even the most simple creatures is rudimen-
      tary, and despite multi-million-dollar research projects such as the European Human
      Brain Project, and similar endeavours in the US and many other regions, our understand-
      ing of the real time functioning – rather than the structures – of the normal human brain
      in everyday human activities, let alone in pathologies, remains rudimentary.6
        We still have no mechanistic understanding of some of the most devastating neuro-
      logical disorders, and decades of careful and rigorous brain research has not led to effec-
      tive interventions in dementias (Mauricio et al., 2019). While gene editing using the
      technology known as CRISPR-Cas9 is now used in plant breeding, it is not generally
      accepted for humans, given the high proportion of failures, even in attempts to target
      well-specified single gene disorders (Zuccaro et al., 2020).7 Genomics has certainly
      helped us to understand the mechanisms of some disorders, but the wholesale revolution
      in genomic medicine promised at the time of the sequencing of the human genome has
      yet to arrive (Coote and Joyner, 2015; McCarthy et al., 2013). Notwithstanding the gurus
      who tell us that immortality is just around the corner, we continue to age, suffer and die
      in grotesquely unequal ways. So despite the claims of technological post-humanism, and
      the hype of the entrepreneurs of Silicon Valley, we remain human, all too human.
      Part Two: Shades of Personhood                         
      Humans are animals, their capacities arise out of intelligible processes of evolution, and
      they share many capacities once thought to be unique to them with non-human animals
      – tool use, capacity for communication, transmission of modes of behaviour down gen-
      erations by learning, active problem solving, awareness, experience and some form of
      sentience or consciousness, and, for some animals at least – dolphins, elephants, chim-
      panzees – the capacity for self-recognition (Ginsburg and Jablonka, 2019). These capaci-
      ties are never just ‘built in’ to the organism, they are always realized in particular niches
      within which those creatures have evolved, developed, and co-constructed (Odling-Smee
      et al., 2013). Yet the human animal has long departed from other animal forms, not sim-
      ply in terms of the size, complexity and plasticity of human brains, and the long period
      of development of humans outside the womb, but also by the almost inexhaustible vari-
      ety of the milieus that they can successfully inhabit. Thus, we do not follow those who
      seek to break down the wall, apparently another Enlightenment binary, between human
      and non-human animals – and indeed between humans and the natural world more gener-
      ally (Descola, 2014; Despret, 2016; Kohn, 2013).       
        But there is another difference. While there is debate about whether non-human ani-
      mals can recognize different individuals, each individual human being, or each one that
      survives into infancy, is individuated by a name and recognized by their face (Ferretti
      and Papaleo, 2019). And in the moment of such individuation, the being becomes a per-
      son, a person only in situ, a unique form of being in its own landscape of being, the
      milieu in which it can make its way, for better or for worse, as a person enacting a par-
      ticular mode of being in a particular material, linguistic, social, semantic ‘umwelt’ of
      signs and meanings.                                    
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               11     
                                                             
       Repertoires of Personhood                             
       In his famous essay on the notions of the person and the self, delivered in London in
       1938, Mauss (2021 [1938]) argued that while the notion of the ‘I’ (le moi) is both recent
       and culturally specific, notions of the person are perennial but have varied over time
       from ‘a mere masquerade to the mask, from a role to a person, to a name, to an individual
       . . . to a being with metaphysical value, from a moral consciousness to a sacred being’ (p.
       260). The Oxford English Dictionary tells a similar story. It finds its earliest usage in
       English in the 13th century, as in Old Occitan, Catalan, Spanish, Portuguese and Italian.
       All have an etymological reference back to the Latin personae, for a ‘role or character’
       assumed in real life or in a drama or story, but also to the idea of ‘an individual human
       being’, sometimes with a qualifying word denoting rank (high or low). Later usages
       distinguish the person from his or her occupation, relate to the living body of a human
       being present at some place without reference to their dress or adornment, that is to say
       to be present ‘in person’. By the 17th century, the word seems to have acquired the fur-
       ther connotation of a being that has reason, reflection and can consider itself as a self –
       which leads to the question posed in The Humanist, in 1994, and that we are still posing
       three decades later: ‘Will artificial intelligence develop to the point that a computer or
       robot could qualify as a person?’8                    
        Of course, there are many other senses, including the grammatical one, but the most
       important for our purposes is that of law, viz. whether an entity, individual or corporate
       body is recognized by the law as having certain rights or duties. As the influential English
       jurist William Blackstone puts it in 1765, in The Common Laws of England: ‘Natural
       persons are such as the God of nature formed us; artificial are such as are created and
       devised by human laws for the purposes of society and government, which are called
       corporations or bodies politic’ (Blackstone, 1765: vol. 1, i, 123). Thus, as is well-known,
       for many centuries in many jurisdictions, while women could be tried in the criminal
       courts, they were not independent ‘natural persons’ in other areas of law, could not own
       property or initiate divorce. In the US, in the censuses of 1850 and 1860, slaves were not
       enumerated alongside freeborn Americans and not counted as persons, and when they
       were counted at all, as required by the Federal Constitution, the Constitution ‘stipulated
       that a slave counted as three-fifths of a person for purposes of taxation and apportion-
       ment of the House of Representatives’.9 The question, then, was not who is human,
       subhuman or posthuman, but which living human being is counted as a person, by whom
       and with what consequences.                           
       Minority Persons                                      
       The term ‘minority persons’ is increasingly used to refer to ethnic minorities or those
       with particular sexual orientations and, more recently, to those with physical disabilities
       (cf. Barnes, 2016). Activists for different minority groups have waged a long struggle
       for their constituents to be recognized as persons at law. But it is not only a question of
       law. Of course the law can be both an indicator of personhood and the grounds for
       claims to be made by those whose status as persons is not fully recognized. But behind
       the law the possibility of being a particular kind of person is constructed out of motley
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      materials – discourses, practices, objects – and always enacted in situ, that is to say in
      particular places, times, niches (cf. Hacking, 1995; 1998).
        There is a tendency to consider persons, in their ‘normal’ state, as unitary, as essen-
      tially whole, distinct from other persons and coherent in themselves, and to think as non-
      unity as at least a potential pathology. In our view this is fundamentally mistaken.
      Non-unity does not constitute an ailment. Let us take Janet (1929) as our example here.
      In L’evolution psychologique de la personnalite, the person is understood as a unity of
      otherwise separate things: a distinction from other such unities (individuality), and as
      integration (actually Sherrington’s term). ‘Une personne . . . c’est un organisme humain,
      avec une tete, des bras, des jambes, mais c’est un corps unique’ (p. 11). A person – unlike
      an object such as a lamp or a table – has personality, which means that its distinctiveness
      is not imposed from outside but is self-generated. Janet thinks this is very important – it
      is surely a vitalist premise that only living beings generate their own distinctiveness. And
      it is the doctor’s role, says Janet, to understand this self-generated distinctiveness. The
      sick person is still a person, but with a different type or level of integration. But, cru-
      cially, Janet sees the integration of the personality not as given but as travaille towards
      unity. It is always a question of a striving, a form of vital activity: ‘nous appellerons
      d’abord une personnalite l’ensemble des operations, des actes petits et grands, qui serv-
      ant a un individu pour construire, maintenir, et perfectionner son unite et sa distinction
      d’avec le reste du monde’ (p. 13). Janet’s own terminology for these worlds did not adopt
      the romantic terminology of ‘wholeness’. The belief in wholeness as the actual, desirable
      normal state of being a person is imposed upon us today, in part by our belief that our
      name indexes the unity of a biography, in part because of the multiple practices of indi-
      vidualization that hang on the name, from the courtroom to the tax office, the passport to
      the death certificate. Janet used the terminology of equilibrium; persons strive to attain
      equilibria, however temporary, both ‘within’ themselves, their varying conducts,
      impulses and forms of comportment, but also in relation to their ‘environments’, con-
      structing milieus which they both adapt and to which they adapt. Persons, as such, are
      living beings, attempting to ward off the ‘catastrophic’ possibility of a level of disorgani-
      zation that overwhelms their capacity to maintain their life (cf. Goldstein, 1995 [1939]).
        Oliver Sacks is the most well-known example of this kind of approach. We can learn
      a lot from his studies of those who live in worlds we have come to think of as ‘abnormal’
      about the vital struggles of humans to make lives for themselves in worlds scaffolded for
      other modes of being. The people whose lives Sacks documents live in worlds where
      time and space and movement have become completely different from those inhabited
      by ‘majority persons’, and yet some manage to live lives they would not forsake. In his
      Preface to the 1990 edition of Awakenings, Sacks (1990 [1973]) writes that ‘what con-
      fronted one . . . was not just disease or physiology, but people, struggling to adapt and
      survive’ (p. xxvii). Indeed, what Sacks provides is what one might term a ‘clinical ethol-
      ogy’ of what it is to be a person. He writes: ‘We must be explorers in the uncanny realm
      of being-Parkinsonian, this land beyond the boundaries of common experience . . . to
      compare being-Parkinsonian with that mode-of-being that we agree to call “normal”’
      (Sacks (1990 [1973]: 8). Sacks, as a clinician, has no hesitation in considering the per-
      sons he is treating as disordered, for Parkinsonism is pathological. It is a difference from
      ‘normal’ response because it disrupts the background taken-for-granted aspects of

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               13     
                                                             
       comportment; a pathological speeding-up (festination) and/or a pathological slowing
       down (akinesia). But the pathology is experienced by the patients themselves, and Sacks’
       accounts leave us in no doubt about their sense of being very painfully taken out of the
       given, ‘normal’, background run of things. The version of Parkinsonism induced by
       encephalitis lethargica and transformed by the administration of L-Dopa was indeed a
       way of being a person, what Hacking might term a human kind, and we should not be
       blind to the looping effects of this as with other categories. But whatever the similarities
       between the persons that Sacks treated and those who live with Parkinson’s disease
       today, the form of being a person that Sacks observed and treated could exist only in a
       particular time and space; it was a way of being a person in a specific niche, a milieu that
       no longer exists.                                     
       Normal Persons?                                       
                                                             
       Sacks’ patients raise the issue of normativity. What, after all, is ‘normal’ personhood?
       Our response is that the biologically normal is always relative to a milieu, and hence
       there are indeed many forms of vital normativity. But there are also disturbances to that
       normativity, whether caused by organic malfunction or other disruptions. Those minority
       persons who are challenged by forms of organic restriction or disablement, either from
       birth or by a disabling medical condition or what are is now termed a ‘life changing’
       experience, are obliged to invent or enact strategies of normalization in relation to the
       milieu in which they live, reshaping both themselves and that milieu in the process
       (Dokumaci, 2020, 2023). Hence such kinds of ‘disorder’ are not merely a reduction from
       a norm that is passively undergone. As Sacks puts it, commenting on Jelliffe’s work:
       ‘Thus, post-encephalitic illness . . . needed to be seen as an individual creation of the
       greatest complexity, determined not simply by a primary disease-process, but by a vast
       host of personal traits and social circumstances; an illness, in short, like neurosis or psy-
       chosis, a coming-to-terms of the sensitized individual with his total environment’ (Sacks,
       1990 [1973]: 21–2). Sacks insists on the case-study method precisely for this reason: that
       it is not just a question of ‘disease’. Thus, when patients take L-Dopa they often don’t
       improve in terms of their symptoms but they do improve in terms of their sense of them-
       selves as persons, able to reach a new compromise with their milieu. As, for instance, for
       Frances D. (Dokumaci, 2023: 63, footnote):            
        In her long years of illness, she had observed her own propensities and symptoms with a minute
        curiosity, and had devised many ingenious ways of reducing, overcoming, or circumventing
        these. Thus, she had various ways of ‘defreezing’ herself if she chanced to seize in her walking:
        she would carry in one hand a supply of minute paper balls of which she would now let one
        drop to the ground: its tiny whiteness immediately ‘incited’ or ‘commanded’ her to take a step,
        and thus allowed her to break loose from the freeze and resume her normal walking pattern.
       Perhaps in this ‘compromise’, this sense of improvisation, we can recognize strategies of
       personhood more widely; for what makes us persons is all the different compromises we
       make with our environment – our habits, our perceptions, our judgements and indeed, as
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Sacks constantly emphasizes, our sociality: to be a person means to co-exist with others.
      It is to be able to improvise and be responsive to one’s milieu and to others.
        What can we learn from those persons who Sacks refers to as inhabiting a land beyond
      the boundaries of common experience, out of step with that mode-of-being that we – or
      the majority – agree to call ‘normal’? We referred earlier to a phrase used by Amanda
      Baggs, an early activist for the rights of autistic persons, especially those deemed ‘low
      functioning’. As she reminds us in her video, ‘In My Language’, there are ‘many shades
      of persons’.10 Baggs creates a circumscribed world and utters cries and shrieks and
      engages in repetitive motions to signal its qualities and boundaries, to bring about her
      own kind of equilibrium. In this world, Baggs is indeed intensely, vitally normal. For her,
      as she insists with such clarity, such behaviour is not irrational or senseless; it is a form
      of making sense, not necessarily for ‘others’ but for the intensely social world that is her
      own ‘interior’ world. If there is no-one else to speak to, after all, we speak with our-
      selves. But, as Baggs insists:                         
        The richness I experience of the world is not merely a more limited version of other people’s
        experiences. My experiences have their own richness that other people may not be able to see,
        and they are far more than a mere lack of movement, conventional thought, speech, language,
        or perception. (Baggs, 2010)                         
        Or consider persons who, for whatever reason, are deprived of one of the senses that
      are common to the majority of those who live in the land we call normal, but who hardly
      experience this as a ‘deprivation’. Helen Keller became deaf and blind at the age of
      19 months, probably as a result of a virus. She emphasized the importance of touch; not
      just that being deaf and blind she had necessarily to resort to touch, but the extent to
      which her sense of touch could replace and even better the other senses; how, for instance,
      she could read character traits in the hand and on the faces of those she met (Keller,
      2010). To read her creation of a viable mode-of-being reveals that there are many ways
      in which personhood can be improvised, and it is that incessant necessity for improvisa-
      tion that makes persons human.11                       
      Personhood beyond the Human                            
                                                             
      So what of personhood beyond the human? The Nonhuman Rights Project (NhRP) in the
      US is trying to get legal status for chimps held in captivity in America and has brought a
      number of cases to court, but so far their claims have been denied by judges on the
      grounds that chimps are not persons (Andrews et al., 2019: 1). Following the traditional
      – though increasingly problematic – legal distinction between persons and things
      (Esposito, 2015), in US law, every entity is either a ‘person’ or a ‘thing’ – and chimps are
      deemed to be ‘things’ and so not eligible for habeas corpus.12 In fact, in European his-
      tory, the distinction of persons and things was not always so straightforward. As Edmund
      P. Evans shows us in enormous detail, from the 9th century to the 18th century, in many
      parts of Europe, animals – from woodworm whose chewing caused church beams to col-
      lapse, killing and maiming worshippers, to pigs and other animals who caused the death
      of innocent humans, to the weevils that destroyed French grapes around the French
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               15     
                                                             
       village of St. Julien in the middle of the 16th century – could be brought to trial in the
       ecclesiastical courts, and if found guilty, sentenced to death (Evans, 1906). They were
       not thought of as humans, but in a certain sense they were considered as persons, as hav-
       ing intentions to commit wrongful acts, and therefore liable to the same obligations and
       punishment as persons with legal capacity.            
        They illustrate our point: that these are ethopolitical issues, and such issues of person-
       hood cannot be foreclosed in ontological or epistemological terms. Is Happy the ele-
       phant, who is the subject of another test-case for the Nonhuman Rights Project, actually
       deserving of some of the rights of personhood because she has demonstrated self-aware-
       ness and hence a form of sentience deserving of respect? The NhRP filed ‘a petition for
       a common law writ of habeas corpus in the New York Supreme Court, Orleans County,
       demanding recognition of Happy’s legal personhood and fundamental right to bodily
       liberty and her release to an elephant sanctuary’.13 Sceptics might reasonably respond
       that while Happy should be treated well, it is absurd to confer personhood upon her in
       order for her to be freed from restricted confinement. But the NhRP garnered support
       from legal scholars, theologians and many other experts in their bid to extend the rights
       and safeguards of personhood to a sentient non-human being. And why stop with ani-
       mals? In Ecuador, legal status is given to forests and nature; and this aligns with some of
       the recommendations of Michel Serres to ordinate a new ‘natural contract’ (Khandelwal,
       2020; Serres, 1995). The idea of environmental personhood is not a posthumanist notion;
       it is rather an event in contemporary ethopolitics – the seeding of an idea derived from
       human personhood to non-human forms of the living.    
        Personhood presupposes the possibility of ethology, an interpretation of conduct and
       behaviour of sentient entities within given milieus (Williams, 2005). Persons do not enact
       what an earlier generation of animal behaviourists, following Konrad Lorenz and Nico
       Tinbergen, termed ‘fixed action patterns’ in which a given stimulus evokes a fixed chain
       of behaviours (see Hinde, 1979). But actually, as a host of contemporary ethological stud-
       ies have shown, most animal behaviour is not of the ‘fixed action pattern’ type. Animals
       shape their behaviour in relation to their milieu; they form their milieu – construct it – out
       of their environment in order to make a world that they can live in (Tomasello, 2022).
       They confront situations and predicaments in given social and material space and react to
       those in ways that may be habitual and non-conscious but are not automatic or pre-given.
       We can extend this line of thinking to AI equipped robots. The question is not so much
       whether they can think, but whether they can have some kind of sentience or awareness of
       their situation, a critical awareness which entails not only inventing novel responses to
       unpredictable changes in their milieu, but also a capacity to reshape their milieu itself in
       relation to their goals. If so, their behaviour should be understood through an ethological
       rather than a merely mechanical account. At present it is only in fictional representation
       that such accounts are possible – one thinks of Ishiguro’s Klara and the Sun, or the movie
       Ex Machina, both of which seem to us to be precisely about this issue. Some years ago,
       Georges Canguilhem remarked that we were not quite at the stage yet when we could
       imagine finding a volume in a bookshop entitled A Computer’s Autobiography or A
       Computer’s Self-Critique (Canguilhem, 2008: 12). Yet, beyond the binaries that the post-
       human imposes on our thinking, we now are indeed at the stage when we can engage in
       the ethopolitical debates about what kinds of entities have potential personhood.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      For some Kantian philosophers – such as Christine Korsgaard – only humans have genu-
      ine autonomy because only humans have language and self-consciousness so as to define
      their own ends and be aware of them at all (Korsgaard, 2006). Such philosophical discus-
      sions are highly normative, based on idealized conceptions of what it is to be a person,
      and assuming that, if we are persons, we are constantly aware of what we are up to, we
      are aware of our ends, and we act – or should be allowed to act – consciously and autono-
      mously in order to achieve them. But this criterion for personhood would rule out almost
      all human beings, given that most act according to ends that they have not consciously
      chosen or willed, and are not autonomous in Korsgaard’s sense, but shaped and con-
      strained by their social, symbolic, unequal milieu.    
        It is not just Kantians who like to draw hard and fast lines between humans and others.
      We might contrast Baggs’s pluralist appreciation of the multiple varieties of personhood
      with that epitome of European philosophy, Martin Heidegger, who insisted that there
      were, so to speak, barrier-like distinctions between dead things, mere animals and genu-
      ine humans; that stones were without world, that animals – and presumably those humans
      who, whether for medical or perhaps ‘racial’ reasons – were ‘poor in world’, and that
      only genuine humans were ‘world-forming’ (Heidegger, 1995: 177). Others take an
      ostensibly less hierarchical view and yet still subscribe to a narrowly anthropocentric
      prejudice. Charles Taylor contends that personhood can only apply to humans since only
      humans have language and so only humans can ‘respond’ to each other. ‘A person is a
      being who can be addressed and who can reply’ (Taylor, 1985: 97). For Taylor, only
      humans can be respondents. One might suspect that only ‘responsive’ humans would
      qualify, and that the severely autistic or those with sensory impairments restricting their
      capacity to hear or to speak might be categorized as non-human or less than fully
      human.14 Whether Heideggerian or post-Hegelian, philosophers have tended to see non-
      human matters in terms of a presumed ‘lack’ of world. But, as we have already argued, it
      is persons that are ‘world-forming’, not just humans. And the essential problems of
      ethopolitics will tend to turn around what is a ‘normal’ type of world-forming and what
      is not.                                                
        As we have argued, human responsiveness is a much wider matter than the possession
      of language and is dependent on a lifetime of experience within all sorts of material and
      social scaffolding beyond the skin of the individual. Gerard Quinn has argued in this
      context that we need a more ‘three-dimensional’ understanding of disability and rights of
      personhood; that human personhood is not just atomistic but shared, part of a surround-
      ing and enabling – if not restricting – world (Quinn, 2012: 40). As such, personhood is a
      category with politicized – or rather, ethopoliticized – boundaries. Its parameters are not
      fixed by ontology, biology or even culture; they have to be negotiated via ethopolitical
      effort. Persons might be defined in terms of their latitudes of responsiveness. A person
      might be defined as an entity endowed with responses that are not just reflexive but, to
      various extents, open-ended, improvised. Persons do not just react; they respond. Animals
      have various shades of responsiveness, and even – at least potentially – certain sophisti-
      cated kinds of artificial intelligence. It is true, as Canguilhem observed, that the condi-
      tion of existence for all forms of artificial intelligence lies in the extended evolution of
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               17     
                                                             
       living creatures capable of making them. There is no primeval soup from which any AI
       could emerge. But nonetheless, such entities may be considered to have the capacities
       that warrant the attribution of personhood if they show sentience and open-ended
       improvisation to manage their existence in a milieu that has not been artificially created
       for them: if they are niche constructors, engaged in milieus in which they have a certain
       degree of latitude in the face of threats which they negotiate, using what is at hand from
       the affordances of their situation, whether these are artefacts such as Frances D.’s minute
       balls of paper or signs, symbols and theories. What is in question is not simply ‘adaption’
       of an entity with fixed capacities to a given environment but the engaged activity of a
       sentient creature creating its life through negotiating fields of experience of different
       kinds. Perhaps the Helen Kellers of this world or Sacks’s patients are exemplary in this
       regard, because of the degree to which they have sought to negotiate the kinds of cata-
       strophic situation that confronted them.              
        We have seen how the concept of personhood, derived as it is from specifically human
       experience, can be seeded and transferred into non-human context. This is what much
       contemporary ethopolitics is about. Debates about the extension of personhood are not
       anthropomorphism – attributing to animals, and even to the environment, qualities of
       human personhood. Nor is it a question of deriving personhood from some foundational-
       ist ontology or epistemology. It is more akin to what Paul Ricoeur once termed the ‘con-
       textualism of the universal’ (Ricoeur, 1998: 61; Osborne, 2003: 529), using the improvised
       variability of human experience in situ as a kind of template. Personhood is not an onto-
       logical category but it is a transferrable one; it is a condition of our own personhood that
       we can debate the politic and ethics – the ethopolitics – of extending the concept of
       personhood again and again beyond the limits that are taken to circumscribe it.
        If our approach is vitalist, it is a vitalism as much of pathos as of affirmation (Osborne,
       2016). To be alive, to emphasize the import of vitality, is not necessarily to celebrate or
       ‘affirm’ life, but to be aware equally of the challenges of life, the catastrophic situations
       in which many people – and non-human animals – find themselves. It is to be attentive
       to the extent to which to be a person is not to be ‘normal’ but always to be, as Janet puts
       it, striving to get beyond incompleteness, or what he calls the sense of ‘emptiness’, work-
       ing towards different kinds of equilibria, however localized and precarious (Janet, 1929).
       This, then, is more the ‘pathic’ vitalism of Samuel Beckett’s characters, struggling with
       their milieu, counting stones in their pockets, a vitalism whose slogan might be ‘try
       again, fail again, fail better’.                      
       ORCID iD                                              
       Nikolas Rose https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4007-5077    
       Notes                                                 
       1. This way of phrasing this issue was suggested by one of our anonymous reviewers.
       2. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnylM1hI2jc        
       3. https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights
       4. https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/convention-on-the-rights-of-persons-with-
         disabilities.html#Fulltext                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      5. https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/06/11/google-ai-lamda-blake-lemoine/
      6. https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/08/25/1032133/big-science-human-brain-failure/.
        One of the authors of the present paper was a member of the steering group of the social and
        ethical division of the HBP for over a decade.       
      7. https://royalsociety.org/news/2023/03/statement-third-international-summit-human-genome-
        editing/                                             
      8. Quoted in the Oxford English Dictionary definition of the word person: ‘In general philo-
        sophical sense: a conscious or rational being’.      
      9. https://www.archives.gov/files/research/census/african-american/census-1790-1930.pdf
      10. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JnylM1hI2jc&ab_channel=silentmiaow. Temple Grandin,
        in her book Animals in Translation (Grandin and Johnson, 2005), aligns autistic personhood
        with that of animals to the detriment of neither. But ‘autists’ are undoubtedly persons, with
        a vital normativity very different from non-human animals, even if they inhabit landscapes
        of being that are beyond the bounds of the experiences that, in our societies, we have been
        brought to take to be normal.                        
      11. For another telling example, see Tito Mukhopadhyay’s (2000) account of the way that, though
        completely non-verbal, he is able to write the story of his life and his inner world, and com-
        municate fluently through prose and poetry.          
      12. On this particular case, see the documentary Unlocking the Cage. As is the case more gen-
        erally with attempts to break down barriers between human and non-human animals, anti-
        racism activists in the US have been very critical when animal rights campaigners liken the
        treatment of chimps to the treatment of slaves in US history.
      13. https://www.nonhumanrights.org/client-happy/       
      14. Presumably Taylor’s criterion would exclude Tito Mukhopadhyay, referred to above.
      References                                             
      Andrews, Kristin, Comstock, Gary L., Crozier, G. K. D., et al. (2019) Chimpanzee Rights. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Baggs, Amanda (2010) Up in the clouds, down in the valley: My richness and yours. Disability
        Studies Quarterly 30(1). DOI: 10.18061/dsq.v30i1.1052.
      Barnes, Elizabeth (2016) The Minority Body: A Theory of Disability. Oxford: Oxford University
        Press.                                               
      Blackstone, William (1765–70) The Commentaries on the Laws of England, 4 vols. Oxford:
        Clarendon Press.                                     
      Bluhm, Robyn, Cabrera, Laura and McKenzie, Rachel (2020) What we (should) talk about when
        we talk about deep brain stimulation and personal identity. Neuroethics 13(3): 289–301.
      Bohan, Elise (2022) Future Superhuman: Our Transhuman Lives in a Make-Or-Break Century.
        Sydney, Australia: New South Books.                  
      Braidotti, Rosi (2013) The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity.
      Braidotti, Rosi (2018) A theoretical framework for the posthumanities. Theory, Culture & Society
        36(6): 31–61.                                        
      Burrell, Jenna and Fourcade, Marion (2021) The society of algorithms. Annual Review of Sociology
        47: 213–237.                                         
      Cacioppo, John and Patrick, William (2008) Loneliness: Human Nature and the Need for Social
        Connection. New York, NY: W.W. Norton.               
      Canguilhem, Georges (2008) The brain and thought. Radical Philosophy 148: 6–18.
      Clark, Andy (1997) Being There: Putting Brain, Body and World Together Again. Cambridge,
        MA: MIT.                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               19     
                                                             
       Clark, Andy (2003) Natural-Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies, and the Future of Human
         Intelligence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.      
       Collier, Steven J., Mizes, James Christopher and Von Schnitzler, Antina (2016) Preface: Public
         infrastructures/infrastructural publics. Limn, 7 July. Available at: https://limn.it/issues/pub-
         lic-infrastructuresinfrastructural-publics/ (accessed 19 May 2023).
       Coote, John H. and Joyner, Michael J. (2015) Is precision medicine the route to a healthy world?
         The Lancet 385(9978): 1617.                         
       Davies, B. and Datta, D. (2003) Mobility outcome following unilateral lower limb amputation.
         Prosthetics and Orthotics International 27(3): 186–190.
       De Waal, Frans (ed.) (2006) Primates and Philosophers. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
       Descola, Phillipe (2014) Beyond Nature and Culture, trans. Janet Lloyd. Chicago, IL: Chicago
         University Press.                                   
       Despret, Vincent (2016) What Would Animals Say If We Asked Them the Right Questions?, trans.
         Brett Buchanan. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
       Dewey, John (1958 [1925]) Experience and Nature. New York: Dover.
       Dokumaci, Arseli (2020) People as affordances: Building disability worlds through care intimacy.
         Current Anthropology 61(S21): S97–S108.             
       Dokumaci, Arceli (2023) Activist Affordances: How Disabled People Improvise More Habitable
         Worlds. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.          
       Dubiel, Helmut (2009) Deep Within the Brain: Living with Parkinson’s Disease. Harmondsworth:
         Penguin.                                            
       Esposito, Roberto (2015) Persons and Things: From the Body’s Point of View. London: John
         Wiley.                                              
       Evans, Edward P. (1906) The Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals. New
         York, NY: E. P. Dutton.                             
       Ferretti, Valentina and Papaleo, Francesco (2019) Understanding others: Emotion recognition in
         humans and other animals. Genes, Brain and Behavior 18(1): 1–12.
       Finkelman, Paul (2012) Slavery in the United States: Persons or property. In: Allain, Jean (ed.) The
         Legal Understanding of Slavery. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, pp. 105–130.
       Fukuyama, Francis (2006) Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution.
         London: Profile Books.                              
       Gilman, Sander L. (1985) Difference and Pathology: Stereotypes of Sexuality, Race, and Madness.
         Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.               
       Gilroy, Paul (2001) Against Race: Imagining Political Culture Beyond the Colour Line. Cambridge,
         MA: Harvard University Press.                       
       Ginsburg, Simona and Jablonka, Eva (2019) The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.                                          
       Goldstein, Kurt (1995 [1939]) The Organism. New York, NY: Zone Books.
       Goody, Jack (1978) The Domestication of the Savage Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
         Press.                                              
       Gould, Stephen J. (1981) The Mismeasure of Man. New York, NY: Norton.
       Grandin, Temple and Johnson, Catherine (2005) Animals in Translation: Using the Mysteries of
         Autism to Decode Human Behaviour. London: Bloomsbury.
       Hacking, Ian (1995) The looping effects of human kinds. In: Sperber, Dan, Premack, David
         and Premack, Ann J. (eds) Causal Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Debate. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press, pp. 351–394.                      
       Hacking, Ian (1998) Mad Travellers: Reflections on the Reality of Transient Mental Illness.
         London: Free Association Books.                     

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                              Theory, Culture & Society 41(1)
                                                             
      Halberstam, Judith M. and Livingston, Ira (1995) Posthuman Bodies: Bloomington, IN: Indiana
        University Press.                                    
      Haraway, Donna (2006) When we have never been human, what is to be done? (interview with N.
        Gane). Theory, Culture & Society 23(7–8): 135–158.   
      Hayles, N. Katherine (1999) How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics,
        Literature and Informatics. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
      Heidegger, Martin (1995 [1929/30]) The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics, trans. William
        McNeill and Nicholas Walker. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
      Herbrechter, Stefan (2013) Posthumanism: A Critical Analysis. London. Bloomsbury.
      Hinde, Robert (1979) Animal Behaviour. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
      Hutchins, Edward (1995) Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Janet, Pierre (1929) L’Evolution Psychologique de la Personnalite. Paris: Chahine.
      Jia, Bing (1999) The differing concepts of war crimes and crimes against humanity in interna-
        tional criminal law. In: Brownlie, Ian, Goodwin-Gill, Guy S. and Talmon, Stefan (eds) The
        Reality of International Law: Essays in Honour of Ian Brownlie. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
        pp. 243–272.                                         
      Keller, Helen (2010) The World I Live in and Optimism. New York, NY: Dover.
      Khandelwal, Sanket (2020) Environmental personhood: Recent developments and the road
        ahead. Jurist: Legal News and Commentary. Available at: https://www.jurist.org/commen-
        tary/2020/04/sanket-khandelwal-environment-person/ (accessed 19 May 2023).
      Kohn, Eduardo (2013) How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology Beyond the Human. Berkeley,
        CA: University of California Press.                  
      Korsgaard, Christine (2006) Morality and the distinctiveness of human action: In: de Waal, Frans
        (ed.) Primates and Philosophers. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp. 98–119.
      Latour, Bruno (1986) Visualization and cognition: Thinking with hands and eyes. Knowledge and
        Society 6: 1–40.                                     
      Lee, Newton (ed.) (2019) The Transhumanism Handbook. New York, NY: Springer.
      McCarthy, Jeanette J., McLeod, Howard L. and Ginsburg, Geoffrey S. (2013) Genomic medicine:
        A decade of successes, challenges, and opportunities. Science Translational Medicine 5(189):
        189sr184.                                            
      Mahon, Peter (2017) Posthumanism: A Guide for the Perplexed. London: Bloomsbury.
      Mauricio, Rui, Benn, Caroline, Davis, John, et al. (2019) Tackling gaps in developing life-chang-
        ing treatments for dementia. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical
        Interventions 5: 241–253.                            
      Mauss, Marcel (2021 [1938]) Sociologie, Psychologie, Physiologie, ed. A. Chevance, J. Clement
        and F. Weber. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
      Mukhopadhyay, Tito R. (2000) Beyond the Silence. London: National Autistic Society.
      Newen, Albert, Bruin, Leon and Gallagher, Shaun (eds) (2018) Oxford Handbook of 4E Cognition.
        Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press.       
      Odling-Smee, F. John, Laland, Kevin N. and Feldman, Marcus W. (2013) Niche Construction: The
        Neglected Process in Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
      Olaronke, Iroju, Rhoda, Ikono, Gambo, Ishaya, et al. (2018) Prospects and problems of brain com-
        puter interface in healthcare. Current Journal of Applied Science and Technology 23: 1–7.
      Osborne, Thomas (2003) What is neo-enlightenment? Human rights culture and juridical reason.
        Journal of Human Rights 2(4): 523–530.               
      Osborne, Thomas (2016) Vitalism as pathos. Biosemiotics 9: 185–205.
      Quinn, Gerard (with A. Arstein-Kerslake) (2012) Restoring the ‘human’ in ‘human rights’:
        Personhood and doctrinal innovation in the UN disability convention. The Cambridge
        Companion to Human Rights Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Osborne and Rose                               21     
                                                             
       Ricoeur, Paul (1998) Critique and Conviction. Cambridge: Polity.
       Rose, Nikolas (2007) The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power and Subjectivity in the
         Twenty-First Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
       Rosendahl Thomsen, Mads and Wamberg, Jacob (eds) (2022) The Bloomsbury Handbook of
         Posthumanism. London: Bloomsbury.                   
       Roussi, Antoaneta (2020) Resisting the rise of facial recognition. Nature 587(7834): 350–354.
       Sacks, Oliver (1990 [1973]) Awakenings. London: Picador.
       Serres, Michel (1995) The Natural Contract. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
       Serres, Michel (2019) Hominescence. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
       Shklar, Judith (1989) The liberalism of fear. In: Rosenblum, Nancy L (ed.) Liberalism and the
         Moral Life, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 21–38.
       Sprevak, Mark (2019) Extended cognition. In: Craig, Edward (ed.) The Routledge Encyclopedia of
         Philosophy. London: Routledge.                      
       Sterelny, Kim (2008) Thought in a Hostile World: The Evolution of Human Cognition. Oxford:
         Blackwell.                                          
       Sterelny, Kim (2012) The Evolved Apprentice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
       Sterelny, Kim (2021) The Pleistocene Social Contract: Culture and Cooperation in Human
         Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.         
       Taylor, Charles (1985) Human Agency and Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Tomasello, Michael (2022) The Evolution of Agency: Behavioral Organization from Lizards to
         Humans. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                   
       Williams, Bernard (2005) The liberalism of fear. In: Williams, Bernard (ed.) In the Beginning Was
         the Deed: Realism and Moralism in Political Argument. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
         Press.                                              
       Wolfe, Cary (2009) What is Posthumanism? Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press.
       Zuccaro, Michael V, Xu, Jia, Mitchell, Carl, et al. (2020) Allele-specific chromosome removal
         after Cas9 cleavage in human embryos. Cell 183(6): 1650–1664.e1615.
       Thomas Osborne is Professor of Social and Political Theory at the University of Bristol, UK. He
       is the author of Aspects of Enlightenment: Social Theory and the Ethics of Truth (UCL Press,
       1998) and The Structure of Modern Cultural Theory (Manchester University Press, 2008).
       Nikolas Rose is Honorary Professor in the Institute of Advanced Studies at University College
       London and Distinguished Honorary Professor in the Research School of Social Sciences of the
       Australian National University. His most recent books include The Politics of Life Itself (Princeton
       University Press, 2006), Neuro (with Joelle Abi-Rached, Princeton University Press, 2013), Our
       Psychiatric Future (Polity Press, 2018) and The Urban Brain: Mental Health in the Vital City
       (with Des Fitzgerald, Princeton University Press, 2022).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                          Body                     &         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                        Society                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                Editor-in-Chief:
                                             MMiikkee FFeeaatthheerrssttoonnee
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                     Editor: 
                                               Lisa Blackman 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                               Managing Editor:
                                               Tomoko Tamari 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    Body & Society hhaass ffrroomm iittss iinncceeppttiioonn iinn MMaarrcchh 11999955 aass aa ccoommppaanniioonn jjoouurrnnaall ttoo
    Theory, Culture & Society, ppiioonneeeerreedd aanndd sshhaappeedd tthhee fifi eelldd ooff bbooddyy--ssttuuddiieess.. IItt
    has been committed to theoretical openness characterized by the publication of
    a wide range of critical approaches to the body, alongside the encouragement
                                                             
    and development of innovative work that contains a transdisciplinary focus.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    journals.sagepub.com/home/bod                            
                                                             