[PAGE 1]
 1322062                                                     
 research-article2025 TCS0010.1177/02632764251322062Theory, Culture & SocietySchwarz
                                                             
                                                             
       Article                                               
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       The Post-Choice   Society:              2025, Vol. 42(4) 3 –22
                                              © The Author(s) 2025
       Algorithmic  Prediction and                           
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       the Decentring  of Choice          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462452153132222006622
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Ori Schwarz                                           
       Bar-Ilan University                                   
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Choice has played a key role in late-modern economy, society, culture and politics,
       but recently predictive algorithms are decentring choice and replacing many of its
       instantiations, offering an alternative way to match individuals with information,
       cultural goods, and consumer products – and to govern people. This article has two
       contributions: first, it contextualizes the decentring of choice within the history of
       capitalism, showing how it emerged once psychological and economics knowledge
       transformed the meaning of choice from an economic engine into a problem (‘friction’
       or ‘overload’). Second, it explores the wider significance and cultural-cum-political
       implications of this transformation. Algorithmic ‘individuation without choice’ challenges
       the role of choice in neoliberal subjectification. Choice is increasingly marginalized in
       everyday practice while retaining its role in justification (as predictions are construed
       as what actors would have chosen). As the decentring of choice expands from social
       media and consumption towards governance, it may pose a threat to democracy.
                                                             
       Keywords                                              
       choice, consumer culture, post-neoliberalism, predictive algorithms, TikTok
                                                             
                                                             
       Playing a key role in late modern economy, society, culture and politics, choice has been
       the social technology and ideology characterizing the Western way of life since the
       1950s: its politics (with citizens choosing leaders through free elections), economy (con-
       sumer capitalism organized around consumer choice) and society (liberalism, with indi-
       viduals free to choose their lifestyle, sexuality, etc.). However, this might be changing,
       as emerging algorithmic prediction technologies complement but also replace and
       decentre choice. At least in some contexts, offering individuals what best suits their
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Ori Schwarz. Email: ori.schwarz@biu.ac.il
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      desires no longer seems to require that they choose. Given choice’s key status, its decen-
      tring may be highly consequential for our culture, economy and politics.
        Sunstein (2015) interpreted ‘choosing not to choose’ (the automation of decision-
      making) through the old lens of rationalization. Under certain circumstances, algorith-
      mic prediction is assumed to maximize utility for individuals, just as choice has done in
      the past, but without the latter’s associated costs of time and effort. Brubaker (2022)
      recognized that this new trend involves much more, namely, a shift away from the neo-
      liberal model of the self (characterized by entrepreneurship, self-production and choice)
      towards a different, post-neoliberal one.              
        This article makes two contributions to our understanding of this development.
        First, it puts the decentring of choice in its historical context within the history of
      capitalism. After briefly discussing the late 20th century post-Fordist era of choice and
      the consequent algorithmic decentring of choice in social media, search, streaming and
      retail, I suggest that choice was decentred through algorithms only after it was con-
      structed as a problem, a potential source of crisis for contemporary capitalism, based on
      new psychological and economics knowledge. The problematization of choice within
      capitalism and the rise of algorithmic prediction are thus intimately interrelated. By fit-
      ting goods to consumers to maximize satisfaction without extensive choice, algorithmic
      prediction is used to solve the new ‘problem’ of choice, reducing the number of choices
      people must make.                                      
        Second, it explores the wider significance of the decentring of choice and its poten-
      tially dramatic political, cultural and social implications, as it may influence subjectivity;
      the notion of freedom; our understandings of the core of humanity and individuality;
      governance; and political legitimacy. Thus, this article contributes to the joint effort of
      exploring post-neoliberalism as a mode of governance and subjectivity (Davies and
      Gane, 2021).                                           
      The Era of Choice                                      
      The late 20th century is widely viewed as the era of choice. Zygmunt Bauman sug-
      gested that, during this period, choice was instrumental in redefining the sacred
      value of freedom. In consumer culture freedom meant individual consumers’ free-
      dom of choice rather than the collective political freedom stressed in earlier soldiers’
      and producers’ societies (Bauman, 1988, 2007). Not unrelatedly, in late-modern con-
      sumer society, choice was widely viewed as the core of self. The therapeutic dis-
      course positioned the capacity to choose at the core of the healthy psyche and the
      late-modern biography (organized as a sequence of choices emblematic and constitu-
      tive of the chooser’s identity; Giddens, 1991; Rose, 1999a, 1999b). Morality has
      been similarly redefined in terms of isolated choices (rather than virtuous ways of
      life), which became the main (nearly exclusive) objects of moral thought and ulti-
      mate expressions of moral agency (Abend, 2014: 41–2). Ever more occurrences were
      interpreted as choices of individuals who may be thus held morally accountable for
      them (Hanson and Hanson, 2006).1 Choice turned into a new form of neoliberal gov-
      ernmentality (Lemke, 2001; Reith, 2004), both a freedom and a duty, through which
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        5      
                                                             
       individuals fulfil themselves, choose whom to become through the market and thus
       govern themselves (Rose, 1999b). Even getting on with one’s life could be framed as
       a constant choice, once the biggest life choices – marriage and profession – became
       increasingly reversible. Thus, even among sociologists – despite our strong discipli-
       nary tendency to view choices as illusionary given strong collective patterns that
       render them predictable – prominent figures characterized late modernity by increas-
       ing engagement of individuals in choosing, as their biographies have become less
       predictable and the default options that once spared choice (such as marriage and
       reproduction) have lost their self-evident status and were reframed as individual
       choices rather than obeying norms (Beck et al., 1994; Giddens, 1991), thus trans-
       forming key social domains such as family and sexuality. While many choices
       remained fairly predictable, choice was not mere illusion but a social technology that has
       reorganized spheres of practices, social, cultural and economic dynamics, as well as a
       discourse that has informed subjectivity.             
        Finally, choice has become an economic engine, as consumer choice turned into
       ‘an ally of economic growth: economic life can be governed through the choices
       consumers make in their search for personally fulfilling forms of existence’ (Miller
       and Rose, 1990). The consumption-focused economy that replaced the Fordist pro-
       duction economy engaged intensively in ‘the industrial production of differences’
       (Baudrillard, 1998). Put simply, unprecedentedly diverse supply enabled individuals
       to use consumption for distinction, to express both their collective identifications
       and their individual authenticity. These uses, previously endemic to fashion (Simmel,
       1957), have expanded to nearly all forms of consumption (Baudrillard, 1998;
       Bourdieu, 1984; Featherstone, 1991). Cultural features that had used to characterize
       certain groups, from music to religion, offered themselves for choice as singular
       goods in global ‘attractiveness markets’, invigorating the economy through its cul-
       turization (Reckwitz, 2020). Product variety and the proliferation of niche markets
       increased demand for goods by exploiting not only the desire for distinction but also
       what economists call ‘variety-seeking behaviour’, the tendency of consumers to
       make different choices at different times. This tendency (whose cultural specificity
       economists deny) emerged together with a new subject, the ‘sensations-gatherer’
       (Bauman, 1995), whose consumption is oriented less towards self-positioning and
       more towards omnivorous experimentation and consumption of experiences. Finally,
       expanding choice was the main justification and cultural engine that allowed neolib-
       eralism to colonize and marketize fields hitherto protected from the market (like
       education), turning them into sources of profit.      
        For all these reasons, in the late 20th century, diversifying supply turned into a relia-
       ble way to increase consumption. Consumption’s double orientation (distinction and
       experimentation) meant that consumer choices were understood as both authentic mani-
       festations of already-existing selves and entrepreneurial projects of self-making (Beck
       et al., 1994; Cronin, 2000; Giddens, 1994). The era of choice may be thus viewed as typi-
       cal of a certain stage in the history of capitalism, the time when capitalism capitalized on
       the subjectivity of the homo eligens constitutive of late-modern political and social order.
       Yet recently, this cultural-cum-economic order is being challenged.
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      Choice-Obviating Technology                            
      Digital mediation and algorithms may decentre choice and mark the end of the neoliberal
      model of governance through choice in two different ways. First, algorithms are ‘genera-
      tive rules’ that cannot be violated, making certain possibilities of action impossible to
      choose as they translate into reality automatically, leaving the governed no choice
      whether to obey them (Schwarz, 2021). Algorithmic generative rules are used by govern-
      ments and platforms to govern populations. They also offer corporations a new way to
      regulate how their products are used (Zuboff (2019) called it ‘the uncontract’) and pre-
      vent undesired uses. While corporations have long used design to restrict and shape
      consumer choice, algorithms allow them to do it much more easily and flexibly, by set-
      ting abstract rules.                                   
        Secondly, algorithmic prediction reduces choice by predicting our desires and thus
      sparing us the need to choose. Predictive algorithms are integrated in ever more systems,
      including recommender systems that shape and replace consumer choice. Streaming
      apps like Spotify, Deezer, YouTube and Netflix try to predict which songs, movies and
      television series we would like to listen to or watch next, and play them automatically,
      sparing us the need to choose. Online retailers like Amazon recommend products that
      might interest us based on our past searches and purchases. Social network sites offer
      users accounts to follow or groups to join based on the algorithmic prediction they would
      interest them, with dramatic consequences (Facebook’s algorithmic recommendations
      are responsible for 64% of all extremist group joins; Horwitz and Seetharaman, 2020).
      Google Maps personalizes the items presented to users on its maps, for example, show-
      ing restaurants that match one’s documented past preferences. Autocomplete and ‘sug-
      gested replies’ feature in email and instant messaging services and search engines predict
      what we want to say while (or even before) typing it.  
        These systems vary in their relation to choice: some of them focus our attention on a
      small set of options (be they books, social media groups, or restaurants) to choose from,
      shaping choice architecture since they predict this focusing would increase our chances
      of making a choice and purchasing; these may be viewed as choice-facilitating. Yet other
      systems – such as music streaming services, social network sites (SNSs) like TikTok and
      personalized subscription services that order products for customers and send them auto-
      matically based on prediction – obviate choice almost completely: choice is only needed
      up to the point that it can be reliably predicted and automated.
        The idea that computer recommendations may assist and partly replace choice is old:
      as early as 1961, IBM developed a system to help department store customers find
      Christmas gifts that fit their budget and the receiver’s age and sex (Cohn, 2019: 1–2).
      However, only recently has the immense growth in computing power and the datafica-
      tion of everyday life made it possible to produce reliable and highly personalized predic-
      tions, based not on a few characteristics but on an immense number of data points
      collected through constant surveillance. These models assume that any past choice may
      be somewhat statistically correlated with our future choices and thus help predict them.
      The more our lives are datafied, the better should algorithms predict our future choices.
      This assumption, however, can hardly ever be put to the test. We do not know what peo-
      ple would have chosen if it were not for algorithmic recommendations, but only how
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        7      
                                                             
       they react to the latter. For example, the fact that users keep listening to the song offered
       to them rather than skip it does not indicate they would have chosen it over all other pos-
       sible songs but only that it is satisfying/tolerable enough to avoid actively choosing to
       change it.                                            
        Kotliar (2021) described recommender systems and personalization engines as
       choice-inducing algorithms designed to affect people’s choices, yet some of them turned
       into choice-reducing algorithms. Unlike the systems studied by Kotliar, they do not con-
       vert people into choosers; neither do they simply shape choice performatively (Graham
       and Henman, 2019). Instead, they reduce people’s engagement and investment in choice,
       and choose for them to serve commercial interests, using dataveillance for ‘behavioral
       modification’ (Zuboff, 2019).                         
       The ‘TikTokization’ of Social Media. . .              
                                                             
       Recent transformations in social media clearly demonstrate the decentring of choice.
       They are highly important, as social media has become a main medium of consumption,
       culture, politics and social relations. SNSs have undergone four distinct stages: They
       started as networks of interconnected personal profile pages containing friend lists. Then,
       since 2006, SNSs gradually introduced chronologically-ordered news feeds, showing
       users the most recent content posted by accounts they befriended or followed. The con-
       tent one consumed was determined by one’s active choices of whom to follow. This was
       a clearly ‘networked individualistic’ model (Wellman, 2002) centred around the autono-
       mous individual’s choices which tie to enter and leave (Bhandari and Bimo, 2022) to
       reflect one’s diverse social affinities and areas of interest by curating one’s unique ego-
       centric network. However, it was gradually replaced by a different model, centred around
       algorithmic curation.                                 
        In the third stage, post ordering within personal feeds gradually shifted from chrono-
       logical to algorithmic. Posts were now ordered based on personalized and dynamic algo-
       rithmic prediction to maximize usage time and user engagement (sharing, liking and
       commenting). This system, first introduced by Facebook, prioritized posts by one’s
       ‘strong ties’ (the content of those with whom one has engaged previously) and posts that
       have already generated high user engagement. Importantly, in all first three stages, the
       choices whom to befriend or follow, what to consume, and how to present oneself on
       one’s personal profile were all viewed as constitutive of a project of self-making
       (Bhandari and Bimo, 2022).                            
        This changed with the introduction of TikTok in 2017, that led the shift to the fourth
       stage in the evolution of social media, the climax of algorithmic curation that has dra-
       matically decentred choice. Prediction was first introduced within choice, to order items
       posted by chosen authors, but at this stage it replaces choice altogether. TikTok differs
       from its predecessors in both its user interface and backstage algorithm, which are
       designed to make video creation and consumption as frictionless as possible. This is
       done by expanding algorithmic prediction, as TikTok algorithmically estimates the inter-
       est of users in videos posted by those they have never chosen to befriend or follow and
       includes them in the personalized ‘For You’ feed curated for each user based on these
       estimations. This renders the choice of friends and followees redundant. By eliminating
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                               Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      choice and friction, TikTok has radically passivized consumption (Brubaker, 2022: 96).
      What matters most is not the visible social network of social ties that users choose, but
      rather the objectified hidden datafied network of past interactions between all posts and
      users (see Schwarz, 2021: ch. 3). This shift transformed social media, since other SNSs
      soon underwent TikTokization, inspired by TikTok’s phenomenal success (a billion
      monthly active users within four years of its launch). 
        American college students interviewed by Bhandari and Bimo (2022) largely avoid
      following and liking content; even when they are excited about a video they consume,
      they tend to keep watching, as they feel no need to interrupt the flow of consumption to
      engage in choice or choice-related reflexivity, that is, to actively follow the video crea-
      tors or visit their personal profile and watch other materials they posted to decide whether
      to follow them. The decentring of personal profiles in TikTok’s interface encouraged this
      trend.                                                 
        This revolutionized social media usage, which becomes clear once we follow trajec-
      tories of new users: rather than ask users to choose friends or followees, consume their
      content, and gradually expand their network (e.g. add friends-of-friends), TikTok offers
      new users content and documents and analyses their reactions and engagement (e.g. how
      long they keep watching before scrolling to the next video) to gradually improve the
      algorithmic prediction of contents that will interest them most.
        Following TikTok’s popularity, its ‘For You’ model was soon adopted by its competi-
      tors, Twitter/X, Instagram and Threads (alongside their more traditional feeds). Facebook
      did not adopt it officially but started adding viral posts to feeds of users who did not fol-
      low anyone among those who created, shared or replied to them.
        While TikTok retains choice to some degree (micro-choices which algorithmically-
      offered videos to watch for how many seconds, reactions that are documented and used
      to improve future prediction), these micro-choices are often spontaneous, instantaneous,
      and non-reflexive reactions (Davies, 2024), and their number should decrease over time
      (ideally tend to zero) as these micro-choices or reactions are collected as feedback and
      personalized prediction should improve over time, thus obviating deliberated choice.
      While not eliminating choice completely, surveillance and prediction clearly decentre it.
        Search engines have undergone a similar trend: in 2005 Google personalized search
      results, using varied signals beyond search queries (location, search and browsing his-
      tory, social network ties, etc.) to predict what users are actually looking for. In 2008
      autocomplete of search queries became default, and since 2010, Google shows users
      search results of predicted queries during typing. Yet, search engines still offered users a
      list of relevant websites to choose from. This format has recently been challenged by
      AI-based search engines like Perplexity.ai that summarize search results and offer users
      a short text answering their query with inline citations rather than a list of links to choose
      from. Google soon adopted this new format and started to roll out AI Overviews in May
      2024.                                                  
      . . .and Beyond                                        
      The use of predictive analytics as a choice-obviating technology, first developed online,
      was later extended to offline spaces in the ship-then-shop model. Traditionally,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        9      
                                                             
       e-commerce customers first actively search and choose the products they want; then they
       receive recommendations for other products based on their past searches and purchases,
       and finally they choose whether to order these recommended products.
        The newer ‘predictive shopping’ (Sunstein, 2015) or ‘ship-then-shop model’ (Choi
       et al., 2024) of personalized subscription box plans goes further by reversing the order of
       action: first, algorithms predict the fit of different products to different subscription-fee-
       paying customers and products are shipped to customers predicted to like them. Only
       then do customers evaluate fit and decide whether to purchase the products or return
       them. By rating the products they received and returning undesired products, customers
       produce feedback that can be automatically analysed to improve future predictions.
       These services promise to excel individual choice by choosing for customers what they
       unknowingly desire but would not choose due to prejudice (Lury and Day, 2019: 18).
       Unlike social media, in retail this decentring of choice is still incipient. Yet, while modest
       in volume, this model is important: sharing more similarities with TikTok, Netflix and
       Spotify than with Amazon, it expands TikTok’s logic from immaterial goods to material
       ones, thus TikTokizing commerce.                      
        Viewed together, these streaming, social media and e-commerce services represent a
       wide shift towards the decentring of choice. Importantly, ‘decentring’ does not amount to
       eradication: human decision-making and agency are not completely delegated to
       machine, and contemporary people keep making multiple micro-choices, even within
       these services. Yet, choices as distinct reflexive moments that punctuate time dwindle,
       and choice loses its status as the leading technology for identifying individual desires.
       While it is hard to tell how far this trend will go, it is hard to deny.
        But what has motivated these developments? I suggest it is perceived economic inter-
       ests. Social media platforms, streaming services and retailers all gradually concluded
       that allowing consumers to choose what they want is not the ideal way to maximize
       consumption or engagement. While doing so, they followed a gradual shift in the per-
       ceived role of choice in capitalism, which predated predictive analytics.
       From Engine to Obstacle                               
       The idea of choice as an engine may sound obvious to modern ears: when people are
       given more options to choose from according to their personal preferences, chances are
       they will find more options in which they are interested, and consequently consume
       more. This idea lies at the heart of the post-Fordist economy (i.e. the shift from standard
       commodities to the production of difference) and was confirmed in multiple studies on
       the consumption of food, television, etc. (Iyengar, 2011).
        However, in the early 21st century this obvious idea was challenged. Choice has grad-
       ually turned into a problem: a new research-backed narrative suggested that once the
       number of options crosses a certain threshold, further increase no longer helps actors
       make more choices that better reflect their internal preferences to increase their wellbe-
       ing; instead, it turns choice into a chore that requires excessive cognitive resources, mak-
       ing decision-making harder, and threatening to paralyze actors. From the viewpoint of
       capitalism, this means that above this threshold, more choice decreases consumption
       rather than increasing it.                            
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
        Psychologists have identified this phenomenon, explained it as resulting from univer-
      sal cognitive limitations (allegedly, our short-term memory can only simultaneously pro-
      cess five to nine items before starting to make mistakes; Iyengar, 2011) and named it
      ‘choice overload’ (framing it as a special case of cognitive/information overload). They
      claimed these cognitive limitations are grounded in human evolution: due to conditions
      of scarcity, choosing among multiple options used to be rare; most problems our forefa-
      thers had encountered were whether to accept or reject a single option. Consumer culture
      has radically changed this. Schwartz (2004) famously claimed the ‘tyranny of choice’,
      the constant necessity to choose among too many options, is the reason why the rise in
      material wellbeing did not result in a similar increase in subjective wellbeing (experi-
      enced happiness). He suggested that while ‘some choice is good’, it ‘doesn’t necessarily
      mean that more choice is better’ (p. 3), as too many options render choice difficult and
      time-consuming, producing stress, depression, bad decisions, regret about choices not
      taken, or self-blame for choices experienced as suboptimal. Put simply, too much choice
      causes suffering.                                      
        The choice overload theory suggests it also causes economic loss. It was empirically
      demonstrated in Iyengar and Lepper’s (2000) famous experiments: when the number of
      options rises from six to thirty, more people choose not to make any choice (whether it’s
      about choosing a jam flavour or a voluntary bonus assignment in an academic course),
      and those who do choose are less happy about their choices.
        Those suffering the most from extensive choice are maximizers (those who are not sat-
      isfied with a good choice but insist on choosing the best), yet ironically Schwartz hypoth-
      esized that extensive choice may transform people into maximizers (pp. 95–6), an
      assumption that was empirically confirmed in the field of romance (where extensive choice
      in online dating encourages maximizing: Illouz, 2007, 2012; Illouz and Finkelman, 2009).
        This narrative did not remain hidden in psychology journals; it was covered in mass
      media, reached wide publics, and influenced internal discourse in various industries. It
      changed the way agents of capitalism understand choice as relevant to their projects.
      Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg cited the ‘bunch of psychology theory that even mak-
      ing small decisions around what you wear [. . .] consume your energy’ to explain his
      sticking to grey T-shirts as part of trying ‘to make as few decisions as possible’ generally
      (Friedman, 2018: A17), and the same theories seem to have informed Facebook’s evolu-
      tion. One industry influenced by the burden of choice theory is the algorithmic recom-
      mendation industry, and particularly the streaming industry: Netflix, YouTube, Spotify
      and Deezer offer more videos and songs than we could ever watch or listen to, and the
      industry frames this as a problem to be technologically solved through recommender
      systems that make choices for users (Iyengar, 2011; Seaver, 2022).
        What matters most sociologically is not how accurately this narrative (or ‘myth’:
      Seaver, 2022) depicts bio-psychological reality, nor even whether it serves corporate
      interests (Cohn, 2019). It is rather that multiple actors believe in it, hence it influences
      the framing and shaping of reality and informs the operation of businesses. Marketing
      scholars came to the surprising conclusion that contrary to conventional wisdom, reduc-
      ing choice may increase both turnover and customer satisfaction (Shankar et al., 2006).
      Iyengar (2011) described how her findings were implemented in both public- and pri-
      vate-sector organizations that decreased the choice offered to consumers to reduce choice
      overload and help them reach a decision.               

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        11     
                                                             
        Choice overload is thus performative, regardless of its scientific accuracy. The decen-
       tring of choice and its replacement with algorithmic prediction are inseparable from this
       new understanding of the meaning of choice for capitalism.
                                                             
       Choice as Friction                                    
       Even without psychologists making assumptions about the human brain’s cognitive limi-
       tations, extensive choice may be viewed as an obstacle to consumption simply because
       the more options are offered, the more choice (or even surveying the options) becomes
       demanding, effortful, and time-consuming. Consequently, consumers may find it diffi-
       cult to make decisions and find the goods that best suit their desires. In economists’ jar-
       gon, choice turned into ‘friction’.                   
        While economists have long fantasized about ideal markets, over the last six decades
       they have grown increasingly conscious of the gaps between reality and their predictions,
       and theorized information-, search- and matching-‘frictions’ as sources of this deviation
       of reality from economic models: actors do not have all relevant information, achieving
       it may be costly, and even attention to available information constitutes a significant cost
       in an information-rich world (Simon, 1971: 41). Thus, like psychological knowledge,
       economics knowledge helped in conceptualizing choice as a problem.
        Search friction is allegedly most prominent in (a) markets of non-standard heteroge-
       nous goods such as labour, housing, and marriage markets (Mortensen, 2011), to which
       most post-Fordist markets increasingly assimilate; and (b) markets with a high number
       of competitors like online platforms, where many sellers compete for consumer atten-
       tion, resulting in ‘congestion in consumer search’ (Bai et al., 2018).
        While more options may help consumers find one closer to their needs and desires,
       once their number spikes sharply, considering all options becomes unfeasible. The num-
       ber of unique items in a typical supermarket soared throughout the 20th century to 30,000
       to 50,000, demanding customers choose from hundreds of similar products, resulting in
       what marketing scholars called ‘sensory overload’ (Sorensen, 2008). Walmart
       Supercenters offer as many as 142,000 unique items (Walmart, 2005), yet even this num-
       ber is dwarfed by the unprecedented supply online, where Walmart offers over 70 million
       items (Bose, 2018), and even more on Walmart Marketplace. Twenty-first century online
       retail has taken the post-Fordist growth through choice logic to its limit, with the ‘long
       tail’ becoming ever longer, since online the marginal costs of adding more products are
       infinitely smaller than in brick-and-mortar stores.   
        This applies beyond consumer goods; singles who use online dating sites (especially
       those living in dense metropolises) may choose among an immense number of profiles
       of potential partners. Illouz (2012) showed how this ‘overabundance of choice’ has ren-
       dered it harder for singles (especially for men) to choose a partner and commit to their
       choice; it devalued romantic relationships and transformed romantic partner evaluation
       while turning singles into maximizers, those that ironically suffer most from extensive
       choice. Their suffering is not necessarily a problem for capitalism: after all, online dating
       platforms do not market romantic partners but dating services; hence, for them, user
       incapacity to choose is an economic engine, not an obstacle.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
        Contrariwise, for retailers the friction involved in extensive choice is a true problem.
      Choice is too time-consuming and strenuous. If only customers could decide what to
      consume or purchase without choice, it would be much more efficient and profitable for
      capitalism. But how can it be done? Algorithmic tools offered themselves as the answer,
      a way to automate choice and decentre it in the consumption sphere and beyond (whereas
      neuroscience offers other strategies not yet used on a large scale).2 Digital tools were
      thus instrumental in both exacerbating and solving the crisis of choice. In TikTok, stream-
      ing services, and predictive shopping, humans remain on the loop but not in the loop (as
      this would have interrupted the flow of consumption, slowing it down by reintroducing
      ‘friction’). Machine learning is used to spare the need to answer the question ‘what do I
      want?’, which has turned into an obstacle for decision-making in general and consump-
      tion in particular. When choice is viewed as an obstacle or a source of friction rather than
      an engine for capitalism, corporations seek ways to reduce it, just as they expanded it in
      the past. The decentring of choice is thus embedded in a new political economy.
      Post-Neoliberal Subjectivity                           
      As shown above, choice was central in constructing neoliberal subjectivity but is being
      gradually decentred with the rise of new knowledge and digital technologies. Could this
      decentring of choice result then in an epochal transformation of subjectivity?
        Foucault taught us that forms of governance, knowledge and subjectification are inex-
      tricably intertwined. Forms of governance are particularly intertwined with discourses
      about the core of humanity, where the truth about subjects allegedly lies; thus, sexuality
      and introspective confessions became such privileged sources of truth in early modern
      Europe (Foucault, 1978), whereas later neoliberal governance through responsibilization
      (Lemke, 2001) has turned choice into the core of humanity and individuality (with
      humans conceptualized as self-entrepreneurs making choices to fulfil themselves: Rose,
      1999b).                                                
        Algorithmic prediction systems learn about our preferences to later reconstruct us and
      hail or interpellate us. While being addressed as people of a certain kind and having to
      react to this address, users develop subjectivity (Althusser, 2014). However, preferences
      are invisible to the naked eye. How can they be known? This challenge can be met in two
      opposite ways. One strategy is viewing preferences as demonstrations of the will, the
      core of the modern subject: individual autonomy consists in the capacity to will, to
      explore and know one’s will, and to act upon it, transform or determine it. This strategy
      assumes that individuals have privileged access to their will, hence the best way to learn
      about their preferences is to simply ask them. Contrariwise, algorithmic prediction tries
      to infer preferences from conduct. Preferences are assumed not to be accessible through
      reflexive introspection; instead, they allegedly lie in the myriad of documented responses
      to stimuli (many of which are instinctive and pre-reflexive).3
        These two strategies rely on opposite views of the core of the individual. The cogni-
      tive sciences draw a rough distinction between two cognitive systems: fast and intuitive
      (system 1) and slow and reflexive (system 2). Both systems inform decision-making and
      action (although their relative importance and relationship are disputed; for a review see
      Vila-Henninger, 2015).                                 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        13     
                                                             
        Where does our truth lie? Is our habitus (our embodied dispositions that generate
       action automatically, or system 1 culture) truly who we are any more than our conscious-
       ness that observes our actions and emotions, gives them meaning and tries to navigate
       them (system 2 culture)? If the culture we internalize throughout our lives in different
       ways – and that turns us into who we are, making us both unique individuals and mem-
       bers of social groups – lies at both levels, as suggested by Lizardo (2017), there are good
       sociological reasons to answer in the negative (pace Vaisey, 2009).
        However, if epistemological technologies assume that the subject’s truth lies at one of
       these levels only, it may increase its centrality in subjectification. Algorithmic prediction
       relies on the assumption that the truth about us lies in our conduct as observed from the
       outside, not in the reflexive narratives we consciously tell ourselves and others about our
       wills and preferences – in our spontaneous reactions rather than our deliberative
       decisions.                                            
        This assumption has become increasingly common. Former Google data scientist
       Stephens-Davidowitz (2017) claimed in his bestseller Everybody Lies that ‘Big Data
       allows us to finally see what people really want and really do, not what they say they
       want and say they do’ (p. 54). Unlike reflexive accounts, the digital traces our conduct
       leaves behind are allegedly free of desirability bias. This truth is allegedly hidden even
       from actors themselves, who are constantly ‘lying to themselves’, even about trivial
       issues such as the films they want to see. Stephens-Davidowitz claims Netflix succeeded
       once it stopped asking users to choose movies for future watching and instead predicted
       preferences based on documented patterns, as ‘the algorithms know you better than you
       know yourself’ (pp. 155–7). This assumption is diametrically opposed to the modern
       assumption, studied by Foucault (1978), that our deepest truth is accessible to us through
       reflexive introspection and to others only through confession.
        However, this reductionist view that ignores consciousness is problematic. For exam-
       ple, let’s imagine that when asked by a platform to choose the topics that interest you
       most you mention foreign news but not pornography. Now, let’s imagine a TikTokized
       platform that, not trusting your statements, conducts experiments and learns that when
       exposed to pornographic images you stare at them slightly longer than you linger on
       foreign news stories. From the perspective of the platform, you are interested in porn
       more than in East European politics; hence, if this particular model is designed to maxi-
       mize usage time using AI tools, it may decide to show you more porn and less foreign
       news. Yet, you may well disagree, for example if you strongly believe that being updated
       about foreign news is a civil duty of cosmopolitans and that pornography is an exploita-
       tive form of prostitution that reproduces gender hierarchies and must be abolished. Here,
       focusing on different levels of culture and cognition as the core of the self results in
       opposite conclusions. While finding it hard to resist staring at pornographic images may
       say something about you and your desires, it definitely doesn’t say everything, as data-
       behaviourist (Rouvroy, 2013) algorithmic models celebrated by Stephens-Davidowitz
       assume.                                               
        Yet, these models increasingly shape apps that increasingly let predictive models
       override users’ stated preferences (thus, dating app Tinder shows users some profiles that
       do not meet the threshold conditions they chose, but are algorithmically predicted to be
       ‘worth the exception’).4 These digital mirrors (Schwarz, 2021) interpellate a system-1

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      self, possibly influencing self-formation (how users experience and understand them-
      selves) and consequently subjectification and user actions.
        For Brubaker (2022: 43–8), algorithmic prediction calls forth a ‘post-neoliberal self’.
      Whereas the neoliberal self-steering and entrepreneurial self was a subject of choice,
      autonomy and responsibility, the post-neoliberal self is passive, a subject of knowledge,
      prediction and control governed by data and algorithms, externally steered by algorith-
      mic systems and predictably responding to stimuli. While choice remains indispensable
      in algorithmic systems, it is emptied, as it is only used to automate and manipulate user
      decision-making. Using Foucault’s terms, he suggested that subjectification shifts from
      technologies of the self to technologies of power.     
        Fisher (2022) went further, suggesting this is not a different subjectivity, but less sub-
      jectivity: unlike other epistemic technologies, algorithmic prediction creates knowledge
      of the self without self-reflexivity, thus impeding the formation of subjectivity and criti-
      cal self-emancipation. This may go too far: people often reflect on the way they are mir-
      rored by algorithmic mirroring, tell stories about how algorithms ‘see’ them (Bucher,
      2017) and try to manipulate it (Bhandari and Bimo, 2022). The self remains the product
      of dialogue, just as it was for Hegel and Mead: users actively participate in shaping it in
      dialogue with algorithmic mirrors (Airoldi, 2022; Brubaker, 2022: 39–40; Schwarz,
      2021: 39–44). And yet, choosing is no longer central to subjectification, as prediction
      gradually replaces it.                                 
        Brubaker (2022) called this the ‘colonization of the self’. However, this should not be
      interpreted as implying a pre-social self prior to colonization. Our choices are always
      socially shaped: through our subjectification (the habitus), through the social shaping of
      situations (to which choice reacts), and through culturally-specific techniques of choice
      (Schwarz, 2018). Sociology has long demonstrated that choice has never been fully
      autonomous and free, and this should not be blurred by narratives on the demise of
      autonomy and the rise of ‘behavioral modification’ (Zuboff, 2019).
        And yet, choosing and being subject to prediction are tremendously different in their
      phenomenology and implications for self-understanding. As Archer (2003) noted, we
      should not collapse the past, where subjects were always socially shaped, with the pre-
      sent, in which they act agentically. It is thus important that active choice is no longer a
      privileged site of agency and subjectification that allegedly reveals our true self qua
      individuals. The latter increasingly experience their uniqueness and agency through the
      way they are predicted and react to prediction rather than through their choices. As
      shown below, this may transform the relations between choice and individuality and be
      politically consequential.                             
      Individuation without Choice                           
      Bauman described how in the late 20th century, the politically effective sacred value of
      freedom has been redefined in terms of choice. But while taking a diluted, consumerist
      and atomistic form, it remained freedom nevertheless. Predictive analytics allows con-
      temporary capitalism to offer us even more far-reaching a deal: giving up this consumer-
      ist form of autonomy and freedom to spare the trouble of choice and increase efficiency
      and convenience for users (Brubaker, 2022: 14–15) and profits for firms. Even worse:
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        15     
                                                             
       this decentring of choice takes place without giving up the role of choice in the capitalist/
       liberal system of justifications, hence it hardly provokes resistance. While we are encour-
       aged to engage less in reflexive choice, algorithmic prediction is framed as producing
       what we would have chosen had we actively chosen. This is obviously fictitious: the
       success of predictive models and their economic value are measured by increase in
       engagement, usage and purchasing, not by their alleged capacity to predict not-yet-cre-
       ated wills. Maximizing engagement obviously transforms, manipulates and co-creates
       the desires it allegedly predicts.                    
        Furthermore, the capacity to know individuals and predict their future conduct qua
       singularities (based on close surveillance of the singular traces of their past conduct
       rather than on group membership) dismantles a key identification in the cultural-ideolog-
       ical scheme of modern liberalism: the identification between individuality and choice. In
       this key 20th century liberal narrative, social and economic pressures towards massifica-
       tion and uniformity constantly threaten individual liberty, whereas individualism, liberty
       and authenticity consist in the capacity to resist these pressures by exercising free choice.
       Choice symbolized individualism and liberty, since only through free choice could indi-
       viduals be true to their unique selves in their consumption and conduct. Hence, the
       romantic sanctification of individual uniqueness necessarily led liberal culture to also
       sanctify free choice. This sentiment underlay the Frankfurt School’s apt critique of capi-
       talism and Fordist massification. It was later co-opted by post-Fordist capitalism
       (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2005) that turned the sacred status of choice into an economic
       engine.                                               
        Currently, predictive analytics threatens to dismantle this association between indi-
       vidualization and choice, offering individuation without choice, or even individualiza-
       tion without choice. Each individual can be treated differently in a way that allegedly
       reflects one’s individuality and unique preferences, without having to choose, engage in
       active reflection regarding one’s preferences, or weigh alternatives.
       New Era, Old Justifications                           
       These new relations between singularity and choice bear on an important sociological
       question: are we still living in late modernity? Reckwitz (2020) famously dubbed con-
       temporary society ‘the society of singularities’. Viewed from his singularization perspec-
       tive, the two historical transformations discussed above are two movements in the same
       directions: the post-Fordist shift from standard goods to singularization and ‘culturiza-
       tion of commodities’ as an economic engine; and later the algorithmic singularization of
       users in digital society. Online, Reckwitz identifies singularization at both the surface
       level (in the algorithmic allocation of attention) and the backend (where constant data-
       veillance of the minutiae of ordinary people’s everyday lives is used to personalize their
       treatment and the information presented to them). For Reckwitz, reflexive consumer
       choice and algorithmic automated singularization are complementing singularization
       processes.5                                           
        This focus on singularization strengthens the view that we still live in late modernity.
       However, viewed from the perspective of choice, these two processes are not comple-
       mentary but rather contradictory and contemporary digital technologies mark a sharp
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      break: While late modernity released us from the iron cage and individuated us through
      individual choice (Giddens, 1994), predictive algorithms offer individualization without
      choice. Individualization through predictive algorithms is thus a-typical not only in its
      relations to collectivity (Lury and Day, 2019) but also in its relations to choice.
        Bauman (1988, 2007) portrayed and criticized the earlier shift from collective-politi-
      cal freedom to the individual-consumerist freedom of choice, challenging Hayek’s neo-
      liberal claim that this latter form of freedom is truly democratic. With the emerging
      post-choice society, the notion of freedom transforms once again: the neoliberal freedom
      to fulfil oneself, express one’s singularity and be who you are (Rose, 1999b) is still cel-
      ebrated, but it no longer depends on autonomy and the freedom to choose. In Davies’
      (2024) terms, it’s the freedom to react rather than to act. While we can doubt whether this
      choice-free freedom is indeed freedom (just as Bauman did for its predecessor), social
      actors often experience it as such.                    
        The post-neoliberal character of predictive algorithms is evident when compared with
      nudge economics. Just like predictive algorithms, the libertarian paternalism of the
      nudge economy assumes that choice is problematic, as irrational psychological biases
      prevent individuals from making optimal choices that truly reflect their will (Gane,
      2021). Yet, it seeks to correct these biases without eliminating choice altogether, by
      changing choice architectures (e.g. by setting default options to influence choice).
      Predictive algorithms go one significant step further in decentring choice, as evident in
      the development of Sunstein’s ideas over the years, from Nudge to Choosing Not to
      Choose. Gane (2021) insisted that nudge is a new version of neoliberalism, not post-
      neoliberal, as it is still aimed at bringing people closer to the neoliberal ideal of the
      entrepreneurial rational chooser. Yet, this cannot be said about the passivized, TikTokized
      self of predictive algorithms.                         
        Importantly, choice is not completely banished: prediction relies on documented past
      behaviour, which is ‘seen to flow from conscious choices’ (Fourcade and Healy, 2017),
      since in contemporary ‘decisionist’ culture, conduct is usually interpreted as the product
      of individual choices (Abend, 2018). Being replaced by prediction, choice is gradually
      banished from everyday practice without being expelled from the space of justifications:
      it remains an ideological justification for the algorithmic determination intended to pre-
      dict and replace it.                                   
        Diminishing and replacing choice may thus be interpreted as the liberation of indi-
      vidual choice from local constraints. This is evident in the morality of predictive analyt-
      ics. As Seaver (2022) showed, the predictive analytics industry makes a moral distinction
      between ‘bad’ filtering imposed by geographic isolation that constrains choice and
      ‘good’ filtering by personalized algorithmic recommendations, which allegedly reflect
      what individuals would have chosen and solve the overload caused by the removal of bad
      filtering. The streaming industry thus decentres choice in practice but retains it as a jus-
      tification, insisting it does not tell people what to consume but rather helps them move
      from one product they like to others (Seaver, 2022: 141, 151), allegedly increasing ‘navi-
      gability’ to help them ‘choose’ (Gane, 2021). Late-modern justifications are thus retained
      to justify a no-longer-modern reality.                 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        17     
                                                             
       Conclusion: Politics beyond Choice?                   
       As shown above, choice was first decentred in the sphere of consumption once it was no
       longer viewed as an economic engine but as an obstacle slowing the flow of consump-
       tion. Yet, given the centrality of choice in late-modern culture, the implications of the
       decentring of choice go well beyond the consumption sphere. It brings about new modes
       of subjectivity and subjectification that are no longer neoliberal and transforms the rela-
       tions between individuality and choice. I conclude my analysis by exploring its implica-
       tions for democracy and political legitimation.       
        Once choice is decoupled from individuation, we must ask: does choice remain valu-
       able beyond its individuating function? Not everyone agrees it does. Sunstein (2015)
       suggested that choice was valuable merely since it was the best way to maximize subjec-
       tive utility and wellbeing. Yet, under certain conditions – when individual preferences
       can be reliably predicted, and when choosing is not an enjoyable experience – maximiz-
       ing wellbeing no longer requires free choice. Then, he suggests, the rational choice is to
       replace individual choice with algorithmic personalized default rules (e.g. predictive
       shopping) that grant individuals the benefits of choice (a fit with their preferences) with-
       out its costs in time and effort. This statement is not purely logical: it relies on the under-
       lying normative position that autonomy and choice have no intrinsic value in themselves,
       once they are no longer necessary for personalization and fulfilling individual desires.
        Yet, even Sunstein admits his criteria cannot be easily deployed in the political con-
       text, as replacing voting with default prediction would be inconsistent with the demo-
       cratic system. It would desecrate the sacred (though often unrealized) ideal of voting as
       the result of active deliberation.6 This deliberate choice act is at the core of political
       legitimacy in democratic societies, as well as the core of political agency and subjectivity
       (just as choice has constituted the core of our agency, self and humanity in late modernity
       more generally).                                      
        Neoliberal expert knowledge has threatened democracy and political space by fram-
       ing political value-laden issues as the search for technical solutions, constraining public
       debate inside a rationalistic iron cage. This was criticized first by the political left and
       more recently by the political right (Davies and Gane, 2021). However, post-neoliberal
       personalization and prediction pose a different threat to democracy: not only the widely-
       debated collapse and fragmentation of the Habermasian relational publicness (Starr,
       2021) and its alleged replacement with multiple echo-chambers, but also the more far-
       reaching threat of framing democratic processes of deliberation and electoral choice as
       mere ‘friction’ unnecessary for the identification and realization of the general will, and
       their gradual displacement and replacement with predictive algorithms. The public may
       spare the effort to politically choose once predictive algorithms predict and estimate its
       general will.                                         
        Indeed, substituting personalization for choice is not restricted to music streaming or
       consumption; it expands and reaches towards the core of democracy, as it transforms
       governance (beyond the much-discussed personalization of news consumption, which is
       the infrastructure informing political deliberation) in several ways.
        First, sociality on social media platforms is governed through prediction of both indi-
       vidual wills (feed personalization) and the general will (A/B tests, which are interpreted
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      as unconscious, friction-free referendum-substitutes). In both cases, prediction bypasses
      reflection and decentres conscious choice. Marc Zuckerberg stressed that Facebook lis-
      tens to users, but less to the ‘anecdotal feedback’ of what they say and more to what they
      ‘actually’ do, which allegedly indicates their true will (Hoffmann et al., 2018: 213;
      Stephens-Davidowitz, 2017).                            
        Second, this new form of governance may expand offline to ‘smart government’ of
      smart cities, where scholars and industry actors imagine how ‘resource allocation will be
      optimized based on the irrefutable logic of data rather than the decisions of politicians,
      resulting in what has been termed a “post-political” world’, allegedly offering more fair-
      ness and equality than democratic electoral politics (Kong and Woods, 2018). For exam-
      ple, monitoring both geo-located biometric data of city users and online discourse may
      help estimate public sentiments and physiological responses to urban spaces and adapt
      these spaces to the general will without resorting to voting or public participation proce-
      dures that require reflexive choice (Jahromi et al., 2019).
        Giving up choice in the consumption sphere marks a departure from the liberal notion
      of humanity centred around choice and its democratic promise, limited as it has been.
      Can this notion be retained in politics while it is abandoned in other life-spheres? Can
      choice be reduced to justification in consumption while remaining a practical principle
      in politics? This is far from trivial: in the long run, post-choice society poses a real threat
      to political freedom as we know it.                    
      Acknowledgements                                       
      I am grateful to Rogers Brubaker, Dan Kotliar and the anonymous referees for their helpful com-
      ments on earlier versions of this paper.               
      ORCID iD                                               
      Ori Schwarz https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3477-4878      
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. For exceptions, see Schwarz (2018) on the interpretation of unwanted sex.
      2. Neuroforecasting studies suggest that decisions based on bodily feedback (Davies, 2024),
        neural reactions to the options (allegedly reflecting non-declarative knowledge), is superior
        to conscious choice (e.g. van Brussel et al., 2024). 
      3. Economists have long framed action as ‘choices’ from which ‘revealed preferences’ may
        be derived, but only once human actions are widely datafied is it possible to assume that
        ‘revealed preferences’ can be nearly perfectly calculated, obliterating future choice.
      4. See: https://www.help.tinder.com/hc/en-us/articles/115003498223-The-profiles-I-see-are-
        far-away (accessed 19 August 2023).                  
      5. Reckwitz even uncritically accepts the prediction industry’s claim that automated singulariza-
        tion simply reflects preexisting ‘interests and desires of subjects’ (Reckwitz, 2020: 187), and
        hence does not inherently differ from active consumer choice.
      6. Indeed, Austrian school economists, advertisers and market researchers used this sacred status
        of choice in liberal democracy when they drew comparisons between consumer choice and
        voting to legitimize consumer capitalism and its practices (Schwarzkopf, 2011) and remold
        the notion of freedom (Bauman, 1988, 2007).          
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        19     
                                                             
       References                                            
       Abend, Gabriel (2014) The Moral Background. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
       Abend, Gabriel (2018) Outline of a sociology of decisionism. British Journal of Sociology 69:
         237–264.                                            
       Airoldi, Massimo (2022) Machine Habitus. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Althusser, Louis (2014) On the Reproduction of Capitalism. London: Verso.
       Archer, Margaret (2003) Structure, Agency and the Internal Conversation. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
       Bai, Jie, Chen, Maggie, Liu, Jin, et al. (2020) Search and information frictions on global e-com-
         merce platforms: Evidence from Aliexpress. Working Paper 28100, National Bureau of
         Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.                   
       Baudrillard, Jean (1998) The Consumer Society. London: Sage.
       Bauman, Zygmunt (1988) Freedom. Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
       Bauman, Zygmunt (1995) Life in Fragments. Oxford: Blackwell.
       Bauman, Zygmunt (2007) Consuming Life. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Beck, Ulrich, Giddens, Anthony, and Lash, Scott (1994) Reflexive Modernization. Cambridge:
         Polity Press.                                       
       Bhandari, Aparajita and Bimo, Sara (2022) Why’s everyone on TikTok now? The algorith-
         mized self and the future of self-making on social media. Social Media + Society 8(1):
         20563051221086241.                                  
       Boltanski, Luc and Chiapello, Eve (2005) The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
       Bose, Nandita (2018) Walmart makes push to sell online goods at $10 and up to capture elu-
         sive e-commerce profit. Reuters, 9 February. Available at: https://www.reuters.com/article/
         technology/-idUSKBN1FS0NZ/ (accessed 17 February 2025).
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1984) Distinction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
       Brubaker, Rogers (2022) Hyperconnectivity and Its Discontents. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Bucher, Taina (2017) The algorithmic imaginary: Exploring the ordinary affects of Facebook algo-
         rithms. Information Communication & Society 20(1): 30–44.
       Choi, W. Jason, Liu, Qihong, and Shin, Jiwoong (2024) Predictive analytics and ship-then-shop
         subscription. Management Science 70(2): 1012–1028.  
       Cohn, Jonathan (2019) The Burden of Choice. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
       Cronin, Anne M. (2000) Consumerism and ‘compulsory individuality’: Women, will and potential.
         In: Sara Ahmed, Jane Kilby,and Celia Lury, et al. (eds) Transformations. London: Routledge,
         pp. 273–288.                                        
       Davies, William (2024) Reaction value: Affective reflex in the digital public sphere. Distinktion
         25(3): 297–317.                                     
       Davies, William and Gane, Nicholas (2021) Post-neoliberalism? An introduction. Theory, Culture
         & Society 38(6): 3–28.                              
       Featherstone, Mike (1991) Consumer Culture and Postmodernism. London: Sage.
       Fisher, Eran (2022) Epistemic media and critical knowledge about the self: Thinking about algo-
         rithms with Habermas. Critical Sociology 48(7–8): 1309–1324.
       Foucault, Michel (1978) The History of Sexuality, Volume I. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
       Fourcade, Marion and Healy, Kieran (2017) Seeing like a market. Socio-Economic Review 15(1):
         9–29.                                               
       Friedman, Vanessa (2018) Shedding T-shirt for a suit and tie. The New York Times, 11 April.
       Gane, Nicholas (2021) Nudge economics as libertarian paternalism. Theory, Culture & Society
         38(6): 119–142.                                     
       Giddens, Anthony (1991) Modernity and Self-Identity. Cambridge: Polity Press.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                              Theory, Culture & Society 42(4)
                                                             
      Giddens, Anthony (1994) Risk, trust, reflexivity. In: Ulrich Beck, Anthony Giddens, and Scott
        Lash (eds) Reflexive Modernization. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 184–197.
      Graham, Timothy and Henman, Paul (2019) Affording choice: How website designs create and
        constrain ‘choice’. Information, Communication & Society 22(13): 2007–2023.
      Hanson, Jon and Hanson, Kathleen (2006) The blame frame: Justifying (racial) injustice in
        America. Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review 41: 413–480.
      Hoffmann, Anna Lauren, Proferes, Nicholas, and Zimmer, Michael (2018) ‘Making the world
        more open and connected’: Mark Zuckerberg and the discursive construction of Facebook
        and its users. New Media & Society 20(1): 199–218.   
      Horwitz, Jeff and Seetharaman, Deepa (2020) Facebook executives shut down efforts to make
        the site less divisive. The Wall Street Journal, 26 May 2020. Available at: https://on.wsj.
        com/3tuCuOs (accessed 17 February 2025).             
      Illouz, Eva (2007) Cold Intimacies. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Illouz, Eva (2012) Why Love Hurts. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Illouz, Eva and Finkelman, Shoshannah (2009) An odd and inseparable couple: Emotion and
        rationality in partner selection. Theory and Society 38(4): 401–422.
      Iyengar, Shanto (2011) The Art of Choosing. New York, NY: Twelve.
      Iyengar, Shanto and Lepper, Mark (2000) When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much
        of a good thing? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 79: 995–1006.
      Jahromi, Ali Jabbari, Oram, Mei-Yee Man, and Shrisankaraan, Villupuram Santhanam, et al.
        (2019) Citizens as real-time emotional sensors in smart cities. ICSIC. Available at: https://
        www.icevirtuallibrary.com/doi/full/10.1680/icsic.64669.571 (accessed 17 February 2025).
      Kong, Lily and Woods, Orlando (2018) The ideological alignment of smart urbanism in Singapore:
        Critical reflections on a political paradox. Urban Studies 55(4): 679–701.
      Kotliar, Dan (2021) Who gets to choose? On the socio-algorithmic construction of choice. Science,
        Technology & Human Values 46(2): 346–375.            
      Lemke, Thomas (2001) ‘The birth of bio-politics’: Michel Foucault’s lecture at the Collège de
        France on neo-liberal governmentality. Economy and Society 30(2): 190–207.
      Lizardo, Omar (2017) Improving cultural analysis: Considering personal culture in its declarative
        and non-declarative modes. American Sociological Review 82(1): 88–115.
      Lury, Celia and Day, Sophie (2019) Algorithmic personalization as a mode of individuation.
        Theory, Culture & Society 36(2): 17–37.              
      Miller, Peter and Rose, Nikolas (1990) Governing economic life. Economy and Society 19(1):
        1–31.                                                
      Mortensen, Dale T. (2011) Markets with search friction and the DMP model. American Economic
        Review 101: 1073–1091.                               
      Reckwitz, Andreas (2020) The Society of Singularities. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Reith, Gerda (2004) Consumption and its discontents: Addiction, identity and the problems of
        freedom. British Journal of Sociology 55(2): 283–300.
      Rose, Nikolas (1999a) Governing the Soul. London: Free Association Books.
      Rose, Nikolas (1999b) Powers of Freedom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      Rouvroy, Antoinette (2013) The end(s) of critique: Data-behaviourism vs. due-process. In:
        Mireille Hildebrandt and Katja de Vries (eds) Privacy, Due Process and the Computational
        Turn. New York, NY: Routledge, pp. 143–169.          
      Schwartz, Barry (2004) The Paradox of Choice. New York, NY: Ecco.
      Schwarz, Ori (2018) Cultures of choice: Towards a sociology of choice as a cultural phenomenon.
        British Journal of Sociology 69(3): 845–864.         
      Schwarz, Ori (2021) Sociological Theory for Digital Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Schwarz                                        21     
                                                             
       Schwarzkopf, Stefan (2011) The consumer as ‘voter’, ‘judge’ and ‘jury’: Historical origins and
         political consequences of a marketing myth. Journal of Macromarketing 31(1): 8–18.
       Seaver, Nick (2022) Computing Taste. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Shankar, Avi, Cherrier, Hélène, and Canniford, Robin (2006) Consumer empowerment: A
         Foucauldian interpretation. European Journal of Marketing 40(9/10): 1013–1030.
       Simmel, Georg (1957) Fashion. American Journal of Sociology 62(6): 541–558.
       Simon, Herbert (1971) Designing organizations for an information-rich world. In: Martin
         Greenberger (ed.) Computers, Communications, and the Public Interest. Baltimore, MD:
         Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 38–52.          
       Sorensen, Herb (2008) Long tail media in the store. Journal of Advertising Research 48: 329–338.
       Starr, Paul (2021) The relational public. Sociological Theory 39(2): 57–80.
       Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth (2017) Everybody Lies. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
       Sunstein, Cass R. (2015) Choosing Not to Choose. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
       Vaisey, Stephen (2009) Motivation and justification: A dual-process model of culture in action.
         American Journal of Sociology 114: 1675–1715.       
       van Brussel, Leonard D., Boksem, Maarten A. S., Dietvorst, Roeland C., et al. (2024) Brain activ-
         ity of professional investors signals future stock performance. PNAS 121(16): e2307982121.
       Vila-Henninger, Luis (2015) Towards defining the causal role of consciousness: Using models of
         memory and moral judgement from cognitive neuroscience to expand the sociological dual-
         process model. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 45(2): 238–260.
       Walmart (2005) Our retail divisions. 6 January. Available at: https://corporate.walmart.com/news-
         room/2005/01/06/our-retail-divisions (accessed 24 August 2023).
       Wellman, Barry (2002) Little boxes, glocalization, and networked individualism. In: Makoto
         Tanabe, Peter Besselaar, and Toru Ishida (eds) Digital Cities II. Berlin: Springer, pp. 10–25.
       Zuboff, Shoshana (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism. New York, NY: PublicAffairs.
       Ori Schwarz is Associate Professor of Sociology at Bar-Ilan University and the author of
       Sociological Theory for Digital Society (Polity, 2021). His research interests include digital sociol-
       ogy, cultural sociology and sociological theory.      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                          Body                     &         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                        Society                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                Editor-in-Chief:
                                             MMiikkee FFeeaatthheerrssttoonnee
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                     Editor: 
                                               Lisa Blackman 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                               Managing Editor:
                                               Tomoko Tamari 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    Body & Society hhaass ffrroomm iittss iinncceeppttiioonn iinn MMaarrcchh 11999955 aass aa ccoommppaanniioonn jjoouurrnnaall ttoo
    Theory, Culture & Society, ppiioonneeeerreedd aanndd sshhaappeedd tthhee fifi eelldd ooff bbooddyy--ssttuuddiieess.. IItt
    has been committed to theoretical openness characterized by the publication of
    a wide range of critical approaches to the body, alongside the encouragement
                                                             
    and development of innovative work that contains a transdisciplinary focus.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    journals.sagepub.com/home/bod                            
                                                             