[PAGE 1]
 1109439                                                     
 research-article2022 TCS0010.1177/02632764221109439Theory, Culture & SocietySeeliger and Sevignani
                                                             
                                                             
       Special Issue: A New Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       A New  Structural                       2022, Vol. 39(4) 3 –16
                                              © The Author(s) 2022
       Transformation   of the Public                        
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       Sphere? An  Introduction           sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121110099443399
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Martin Seeliger                                       
       Institute for Labor and the Economy, Bremen           
                                                             
       Sebastian Sevignani                                   
       Friedrich Schiller University Jena                    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       The political public sphere is important for democracy, and it is changing – this is
       how the quintessence of Jürgen Habermas’s monumental study on The Structural
       Transformation of the Public Sphere (1989) could be summarized in simple words. In
       the fields of political sociology and social theory, history, but also research on social
       movements, cultural studies, and media and communication studies, his conception of
       the public sphere as a sphere mediating between the state and civil society has had a
       decisive influence on the debate about the potential of collective reason for modern
       democracy. In this introduction we give a short overview of Habermas’s arguments on
       the rise and fall of the bourgeois public sphere, demonstrate the necessary link between
       the public sphere and democracy and, referring to the contributions to this special
       issue, sketch current transformations of the public sphere along three basic processes
       – digitalization, commodification, and globalization. 
       Keywords                                              
       commodification, democracy, digitalization, globalization, Habermas, public sphere
                                                             
                                                             
       The political public sphere is important for democracy, and it is changing – this is
       how the quintessence of Jürgen Habermas’s monumental study on The Structural
       Transformation of the Public Sphere (1989) could be summarized in simple words. In
       the fields of political sociology and theory, history, but also research on social move-
       ments, cultural studies, and media and communication studies, his conception of the
       public sphere as a sphere mediating between the state and civil society has had a
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Sebastian Sevignani. Email: sebastian.sevignani@uni-jena.de
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                               Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      decisive influence on the debate about the potential of collective reason for modern
      democracy. The contributions in this special issue take a close look at the current trans-
      formations of the public sphere regarding possible implications for democracy. They
      critically emphasize the central role of functioning and lively public spheres for the
      legitimacy and effectiveness of democracy and seek various connections to the work
      of Jürgen Habermas. In doing so, the fruitfulness and contentiousness as well as the
      topicality of his transdisciplinary theory of the public sphere is impressively demon-
      strated, e.g. from theoretical perspectives such as Marxism, critical theory / the
      Frankfurt School, the Gramscian theory of hegemony, poststructuralism, and critical
      political economy. As a conclusion to this issue, Habermas (2022) himself presents his
      own ideas on the current transformation of the political public sphere, which we choose
      not to anticipate in this introduction.                
      The Rise of the Bourgeois Public Sphere                
      In his seminal book, Jürgen Habermas poses the question of the possibility of the forma-
      tion of social order through reasonable communication, a question that is successively
      elaborated in the course of his further work. To answer this question, Habermas recon-
      structs the development of the political public sphere from the late 17th century in
      England to the present day of German corporatism in the 1960s, with a view to the
      development of political mass communication. The formation of the modern political
      public sphere follows at the beginning from two central moments: first, the institution
      of the bourgeois nuclear family as an intimate sphere offers its members the space of a
      ‘voluntary community of love and education’ (Hartmann, 2006: 169) through which its
      members learn – free from immediate economic constraints – an ‘ideal of unconstrained
      humanity’ (Hartmann, 2006: 169). Second, at least for the male heads of families, ‘the
      bourgeois public sphere of an initially relatively small audience of private individuals
      interested in art and literate, who soon also demanded a political voice’ (Habermas,
      2020: 105), was opened up – first through an increasingly lively correspondence and
      later through newspaper reading and participation in (exclusive) rounds in clubs and
      coffeehouses (see Table 1). The establishment of a general (high) school and education
      system finally completes the ‘connection between democracy, public education and citi-
      zenship’ (Binder and Oelkers, 2017: 9) through the comparison of opinions and posi-
      tions in public debate. The political public sphere thus emerges as the sphere that
      Habermas will conceptualize as the mediating instance between society and
      parliament.                                            
        This sphere experiences a consolidation in the course of the further social moderniza-
      tion of the 18th century, which assigns ‘eo ipso a political significance’ (Heming, 1997:
      60) to the public debate between conflicting interests. At the same time, the socioeco-
      nomic contrasts in society open up a scope for economic and socio-political intervention
      by the state. Within these political fields, a constellation emerges during the 19th
      century through which parties and associations organize a collective representation of
      societal interests. For Habermas, the transformation of the liberal constitutional state
      into a social state framed in terms of interest politics – together with the development of
      the electronic mass media as a relatively centralistic, nationally framed conglomerate
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         5      
                                                             
       Table 1. The rise and fall of the bourgeois public sphere according to Habermas (1989).
                Structural transformation 1: Structural transformation 2:
                Formation of the bourgeois public Disintegration of the bourgeois
                sphere               public sphere           
       Structure of • differentiation of the private • entanglement of the private
       society    sphere (civil society and family) sphere and the public sphere
                  and the state, as well as a through a) a welfare state
                  mediating public sphere (hinge intervening in the private sphere
                  function) that functions as a and b) the instrumentalization
                  sphere of critique of public of the public sphere by
                  violence/the state.  private interests and state
                • polarization of the private interests (strategic rather than
                  sphere into market and family: communicative action)
                  detachment of the family • privacy as a space for the
                  from productive functions and formation of particular interests
                  institutionalization as a place of         
                  exercise of general humanity               
                  (literary public sphere as a               
                  prefiguration of the civic public          
                  sphere)                                    
       Economy  • change from feudal economy to • change from competitive
                  competitive capitalism with free capitalism to oligopoly capitalism
                  movement of goods    with state re-distribution
                • private cultural production • private and state cultural
                  predominantly for résonnement production for PR, sales and
                  (culture-granting public) manipulation (culture-consuming
                • sovereign citizenship secured by audience) 
                  private property appears to be • continued class polarization
                  generalizable                              
       Media    • the audience as addressees of • enlightenment periodicals are
       organization state-public power through replaced by electronic mass
       and technology proclamation media changes media; these generalize the
                  to an audience of gathered potentials of communicative
                  private people, who form action, but have a limiting
                  assembly publics by means of effect as bequeathed mass
                  enlightenment periodicals media and hierarchize public
                                       communication, thereby
                                       assembly publics      
       which, in his view, limits ‘the reactions of their recipients in a peculiar way’ (Habermas,
       1989: 171) – form the developmental moment of a second structural transformation of
       the public sphere.                                    
        By contrasting two (stylized) stages of development of the political public sphere,
       Habermas gains the standard of comparison for his ideology critique of a ‘re-feudalized’
       society. The comparison of the different phases thus serves him as an (empirical and
       normative) basis for a democratic-theoretical critique of public decision-making in the
       bequeathed political systems of Western post-war democracies and beyond.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                               Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
        Unlike in later writings, the public sphere in structural change is thus not only assigned
      the character of an institutional sphere of its own with a key significance for the function-
      ing of democratic polities. The contribution of the study lies rather in the fact that
      Habermas describes the process character of this sphere as a structural transformation of
      the public sphere. Habermas develops the parameters of this structural transformation
      within three dimensions of analysis, which he does not explicitly name as such: within
      the (socio-)spatial frame of reference, the first structural transformation involves the dif-
      ferentiation of the private sphere (civil society and family) and the (national) state as well
      as a mediating public sphere as the sphere of its critique. Here, the family becomes the
      place where a general humanity is practised. In the second structural transformation, the
      private sphere and the public sphere are again intertwined by a welfare state intervening
      in the private sphere and the instrumentalization of the public sphere by private and state
      interests (Habermas will later define this as an excess of strategic action in place of com-
      municative action).                                    
        In a second dimension of analysis, Habermas considers the impact of the economic
      conditions on the structural transformation. In the first sequence from a feudal economy
      to capitalism, private cultural production takes place above all for the bourgeois public
      of the coffee houses and salons, whose citizenship, secured by the ownership of private
      property, Habermas generalizes here as an ideal. The second structural transformation
      then takes place in the transition from competitive capitalism to oligopoly capitalism
      supported by state redistribution. Here, cultural production takes place in both state and
      private as public relations work and under conditions of continued class polarization.
        As the technical media of dissemination change in a third dimension, the citizens as
      addressees of state-public violence are transformed into a group of private citizens
      assembled as a public, who form assembly publics by means of educational periodicals.
      In the second developmental sequence of structural transformation, these educational
      periodicals are replaced by electronic mass media. Although these generalize the poten-
      tial for communicative action, they have the effect of restricting and hierarchizing public
      communication. Under the influence of public relations media, collective publics are
      transformed into manufactured publics.                 
      Democracy and the Public Sphere                        
      Generally, the fundamental concept of democracy refers to a political order based on the
      ‘rule of the people’. In the history of ideas as well as in political practice, three essential
      rationales legitimize this system of rule. While a republican idea highlights participation
      of citizens in the procedures of political decision-making (Arendt, 2009), representatives
      of liberalism defend the possibility of individual freedom within a diverse society (Mill,
      1991). A third social democratic line of tradition finally proclaims the necessity of mate-
      rial redistribution, to stabilize economic living conditions (e.g. via labour market regula-
      tion or the welfare state; see Marshall and Bottomore, 1992). Drawing on Rosanvallon
      (2013: 29), four spheres of democracy can be distinguished. As a practice carried out by
      citizens, it consists of the general right to vote, which was gradually extended through
      additional needs and entitlements. These rights then consolidated within democracy as a
      political system, whose institutions and procedures were to maintain the common good
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         7      
                                                             
       under the aspects spelled out in the first dimension. Thirdly, as a societal form, democ-
       racy is meant to realize an idea of equality and community. And finally, as a mode of
       governance, it is supposed to ensure moderation between conflicting interests within
       society. Regarding its legitimacy as a form of governance, Fritz Scharpf (1999) high-
       lights two dimensions of democracy. While an input-oriented perspective on the people’s
       impact on state politics must focus their authentic preferences, an output-oriented
       approach highlights the effectiveness of political measures. To generate an effective out-
       put, one could now assume, what is required is an effective input. The intensity of the
       linkage between the people’s preferences can, according to Pitkin (1967), be identified
       as responsiveness of democratic rule.                 
        A critique of the lack of responsiveness of the prevailing democratic politics towards
       the people of the state has become the starting point of a series of crisis diagnoses from
       the field of social science in the last two decades, which attests to a series of structural
       dysfunctions (Crouch, 2004, 2020; Streeck, 2014, Geiselberger, 2017; Brown, 2015).
       Following the dimensional distinction proposed by Rosanvallon (2018), the current cri-
       sis of democracy is expressed in the dimensions presented here both in practice as civic
       activity (declining voter turnout and citizens’ identification with parties), as well as in
       the dynamics of the political system (volatile voter preferences translate into difficulties
       in finding majorities with a general loss of importance of parliaments), its form of soci-
       ety (increasing inequality and social exclusion), and its form of government (one-sided
       privileging of capital interests).                    
        At this point the concept of the public sphere becomes important. It derives from
       the German term ‘Öffentlichkeit’ (a state of general perceptibility). This term stands
       out through multiple meanings. Not only did the modernization of the state bring
       about citizen rights, such as public property (e.g. a public bench in a public park).
       Moreover, public communication (and its social preconditions) became one corner-
       stone of modern society. As a fundamental problem of democratic rule, we have
       defined the question to be how a pluralistic society can justify a social order that is
       resting on self-determination and equality of its members. In the constitutional state
       these problems are being solved via formal institutionalization of rules meant to
       structure collective decision-making. However, due to permanent social chance, a
       durable fixation of such rules is impossible. Another form of moderating conflicting
       interests in the mode of collective learning is provided through the framework of the
       public sphere. As a central medium of bourgeois emancipation, the liberal public can
       enable debates, through which participants can change their interests or even reach
       consensus. In line with Neidhardt (1994: 10), we can – most generally – understand
       public spheres to be emerging where speakers communicate to an audience whose
       limits they cannot determine. Thus, public communication is often uncertain and
       bears a strong chance of creating surprises. Due to the general open-endedness of
       deliberative processes, the quality of democratic rule depends on the organization of
       the public sphere. From the angle of democratic theory, we can – according to Fraser
       (2007) and in line with Scharpf’s (1999) in-put/output-model – draw on two ends of
       the public sphere: its normative legitimacy and its political effectiveness: ‘Without
       them’, so Fraser (2007: 8) concludes, ‘the concept loses its critical force and its politi-
       cal point.’                                           

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                               Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
        This normative requirement can be traced back to three principles (or functions) of
      public spheres addressed by Neidhardt (1994: 8). For the purpose of general transpar-
      ency, the public sphere should be open for all social groups, topics, and opinions that
      hold collective relevance. To ensure collective validation, actors who participate in the
      public sphere should (have to) deal with topics and opinions of other participants, in
      order to (possibly) change their own standpoints. Finally, for the cause of general orien-
      tation, the public sphere brings about public opinions (which, in practice, however,
      become diversely effective). Tightly connected to this third dimension is the collective
      identity of the audience, whose participants are connected via similar patterns of media
      consumption. Only insofar as it identifies itself as a public sphere does a context emerge
      that enables mutual addressing, understanding, and responding within public discourses
      (Weßler and Wingert, 2007: 22). As a sphere of private people coming together, the pub-
      lic sphere thus does not only require a shared practice of performative co-construction,
      but also a shared imagination among its participants. While this rather narrow idea of
      social inequality refers to discrepancies among active participants, Fraser (1992) pro-
      poses a more profound analysis of the nexus between inequality and the public sphere. In
      ‘societies whose basic institutional framework generates unequal social groups in struc-
      tural relations of dominance and subordination’, Fraser (1992: 122) states, ‘full parity of
      participation in public debate and deliberation is not within the reach of possibility.’
      Therefore, the question arises as to which form of political public sphere (and public life
      in toto) serves best to secure equality in participation between privileged and disadvan-
      taged groups (or between the dominating and the dominated). This triad of public sphere
      functions was developed following the normatively demanding discursive public sphere
      model of Jürgen Habermas, which is also the most important reference point of this spe-
      cial issue. It should be mentioned here – and in part there are also corresponding refer-
      ences in the contributions to this issue – that, with Ritzi (2013: 179ff.), in addition to the
      discursive public sphere model at least two alternatives can also be distinguished: the
      less sophisticated mirror model (e.g. Luhmann, 2010) and the post-structurally informed
      model of politicizing publics (e.g. Mouffe, 2005). While the former places the transpar-
      ency function of the public sphere at the centre and remains normatively sceptical about
      the validation and orientation or identity function, the latter emphasizes the orientation
      or identity function of the public sphere. We could also add the pragmatist theory of the
      public sphere and democracy as a separate approach (e.g. Dewey, 1946) to the tableau of
      public sphere theories. Pragmatist public sphere theory, in turn, clearly focuses on
      validation.                                            
        The emerging public sphere of interlinking publics thus bears the central burden for
      the functioning of democracy – a lively public sphere is supposed to, first, make and
      control decisions (politics); second, identify problems and find solutions for them (epis-
      temology); and third, include and form opinions (culture). From this background, we can
      ask not only to what degree publics exist and the principles of the public sphere extend
      to society, but also what (democratic) qualities do they have. As far as the political role
      of the public is concerned, a two-track understanding of democracy is at issue. The dis-
      tinction between publics, where the will of those affected by political decisions is articu-
      lated, and political institutions and representative bodies, which carry out those decisions,
      inevitably returns (cf. Fraser, 2014: 142). However, this does not rule out any radical and

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         9      
                                                             
       participatory models of democracy. These propose the closest possible linkage of politi-
       cal institutions to the public sphere and are sometimes oriented toward the possibility of
       self-socialization through strong publics (Sevignani, this issue). Publics then not only
       identify domination as legitimate but become the source of domination themselves. It
       also becomes clear that the assumption that publics themselves cannot rule does not pre-
       vent us from democratizing the ruling institutions and increasingly organizing them in
       accordance with the public principle (Seeliger et al., this issue). This also implies that the
       constitutional conditions of the public sphere, i.e. the technical and media infrastruc-
       tures, would have to be publicly appropriated and that a new public media system would
       have to be developed. The problem of democratization then becomes one of extending
       the public sphere principle and determining the relationship between strong and weak
       publics.                                              
        In addition to this focus on politically institutionalized rule (making and controlling
       decisions), the epistemic and identity-constructive function of the public sphere must
       also be kept in mind from a democratic theory perspective. The public sphere should be
       able to pose and order problems in the first place, before they are dealt with politically.
       This forum function of the public sphere, according to which public spheres should ena-
       ble the collective perception and discussion of generally relevant problems and the coop-
       erative search for common solutions to problems, corresponds to the epistemic dimension
       of democracy of producing solutions to problems that are as efficient as possible and at
       the same time capable of being agreed upon. Public spheres, especially when they are
       organized in a participatory and egalitarian manner, thus contribute to the effectiveness
       of democracies in this way as well.                   
        The effectiveness of weak, deliberative public spheres refers to their problem-solving
       competence, as well as to the possibility of generating legitimacy for political decisions
       made elsewhere and thus of exercising control and criticism vis-à-vis the ruling power.
       The effectiveness of strong, decisive publics refers to their problem-finding and prob-
       lem-solving competence, as well as to their ability to generate legitimacy for these pro-
       cedures at the same time. For them to be dealt with politically, problems must be
       interpreted in a process of opinion formation. In public spheres, people speak, ideally
       listen, and, in the best case, a mutual irritation emerges from this communication pro-
       cess, followed by a change that does not leave both speakers and listeners unchanged
       (Rosa and Sevignani, this issue). Questions then arise from a democratic theory perspec-
       tive, about access to (input), articulation and attention in (throughput), and (will and
       opinion) formation through publics (output). Being able to speak alone is not enough to
       set the transformative potential of publics in motion; it also requires listeners. But even
       the meeting of speaker and listener does not establish deliberation; their communicative
       exchange must make a difference and trigger subject- and opinion-transformative (learn-
       ing) processes. Habermas’s deliberative theory of democracy understands this well and
       thus focuses on the through- and output-processes of public communication.
        So, does deliberation exist in publics? And if so, what quality does it assume? The
       former has been discussed by Habermas as communication displacement in the
       (acclamatory) public sphere and its ‘re-feudalization’; a kind of communication situa-
       tion emerges without actual communication, where communication flows uni- rather
       than bi-directionally. Actors make strategic use of publics. But if there is bi-directional

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      communication, some deliberative effects can be expected. The diagnoses of fragmen-
      tation and polarization of the public sphere both refer to the quality of understanding
      and opinion formation. In the first case, it takes place in sub-publics that are separated
      from each other, without overlaps; in the second case, however, there are overlaps in
      the sense of a centrifugal repulsion between the sub-publics. The idea of a concurrence
      of speaking and listening, as well as the possibility of identity formation and learning
      in publics, keeps pushing critical public sphere theory to ask what communication
      participants have in common before or after deliberation, and what they should have.
      A critical theory of the public sphere assumes a specific subjectivity, according to
      which people want to shape history (cf. Fraser, 2014; Rosa, this issue). In a functional-
      ist twist on this rationale, it can be argued that once the interplay between the modern
      public sphere and sociality has settled in, the actors involved in it cannot simply decide
      to roll back the public sphere or suspend reason (cf. Trenz, 2021). Even more univer-
      sally, Habermas argues that in order to communicate one has to pose and necessarily
      refer to basic validity claims that may create the social bond of the public sphere.
      However, all such assumptions become tested anew when the principle of justification
      as a bond between different points of view and opinions is eroded, e.g. in the course of
      ‘post-factual politics’ (Van Dyk, this issue).         
      The Current Structural Transformation of the Public    
      Sphere                                                 
      The starting thesis of this contribution is that within the three dimensions that Habermas’s
      sociological analysis focuses on – the (socio-)spatial frame of reference, the economic
      framework, and the technical media of dissemination – a new, if you will, a third struc-
      tural transformation of the public sphere is currently taking place. This structural trans-
      formation, we will argue further, is directly related to the crisis phenomena of
      contemporary democracies described at the beginning of this introduction (see Table 2).
      Against this background, the new structural transformation of the public sphere is taking
      place in the field of tension between three institutional developments – digitalization,
      commodification, and globalization of the social.      
                                                             
      Digitalization                                         
      The way public spheres are organized technically and institutionally in a media system
      has implications for the possibilities and quality of deliberation and opinion formation.
      Digital structural change takes place in interconnected processes of disintermediation
      and re-intermediation through new platforms. In this process, professional journalism,
      and traditional mass media, which largely organized publics, are increasingly bypassed
      as gatekeepers of public communication flows with the help of digital and social media
      (see Sevignani, this issue). Digital media facilitate access to publics and contain the
      promise of bi-directional communication. As a result of easier access, public spheres
      subsequently expand, blurring the boundaries of different levels of public sphere between
      individual, group, and mass communication – semi-publics at the interface with the pri-
      vate sphere and personal issues. This expansion leads to a pluralization of public spheres,
      as individual media or communicators tend to achieve decreasing reach.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         11     
                                                             
       Table 2. Aspects of a third structural transformation of the public sphere.
                Digitalization Commodification Globalization 
       Transparency Easier access to Privatization Larger frame
                information; at the same subordinates agenda- of reference as
                time, however, greater setting to market logic fragmentation upward
                lack of transparency        reduces transparency
       Validity Fragmentation Intertwining of public Tendency to broaden
                downward (e.g. through sphere, consumption the spectrum
                filter bubbles) and and entertainment of participants,
                simultaneous delimitation weaken rational transnational (or
                of discourse communities discourse effects even global) rational
                                            discourse effects are
                                            less pronounced  
       Orientation Networking of private Audience as Transnational identity
       & Identity opinions, classification customers or and selective publics,
       formation and manipulation, and entrepreneurial selves, publics for single social
                differentiation of the partly collective strata
                spectrum of opinion identity (e.g. in        
                              movements like                 
                              Occupy or consumer             
                              public spheres)                
        These changes on the input side of the public sphere have effects on deliberation
       practices and their results. The ambivalences of the structural change of the political
       public sphere, which have already been mentioned in the context of the expansion of its
       socio-spatial frame of reference, come to light even more strongly in its digitalization.
       While the traditional mass media were still able to focus public attention relatively well
       on a few specific topics, this appears to be increasingly difficult to realize under the new
       conditions. The upgrading of the user role from readers to authors increases the number
       of concerns fed into the public discussion process and thus also the complexity of public
       communication as a whole. While the articulation of political concerns and their mutual
       validation becomes potentially more representative, it also appears to be more difficult
       to consider comprehensively. Contrary to the consideration of an expanded spectrum of
       opinion, however, is the thesis of a fragmentation of the public sphere into homosocial
       filter bubbles and echo chambers. The extent to which the digitalization of political com-
       munication is able to shape collective patterns of orientation and broadly inclusive public
       identities as reference elements of democratic public spheres is also an open question.
        It is, however, certainly true that this question and the democratic implications of digi-
       tal communication cannot be answered appropriately without taking into account new
       forms of (re-)intermediation. Communication streams increasingly run through digital
       platforms that curate them in an automated way according to criteria other than those
       applied in journalism. Real restrictions, excommunications (as happened in Trump’s
       case in January 2021) rarely occur; rather digitalization strongly merges with commodi-
       fication. As private arcana areas, the new switching points of the public sphere are largely
       withdrawn from public negotiation (Beyes, this issue). The new platform intermediaries
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      are strongly organized according to profit considerations and apply surveillance-based
      business models.                                       
        Their monitoring and evaluation of digital communication serves a cybernetic logic
      of control where communicative action becomes more effectively controllable, or even
      enables feedback-logical propaganda in the interest of those who have the data or know
      how to use them. This sets the course either toward a shutdown of deliberation in the
      sense of a mere networking of private opinions (Sevignani, this issue) or an increasingly
      acclamatory form of the public sphere, as expressed, for example, in simple ‘like’ or ‘dis-
      like’ expressions, within a mode of ‘privatized representation’ (Staab and Thiel, this
      issue). Or digital communication organized in this way leads to more fragmented and
      polarized deliberative outcomes. In terms of democratic theory, we are then dealing with
      a tension between pluralization on the one hand and the problems of disintegration
      through the displacement of the public sphere, its fragmentation and polarization on the
      other. The strong fragmentation thesis of a lack of socio-spatial overlap and of publics
      isolated from one another, however, has so far found little empirical foundation. More
      plausible seems to be the polarization problem of disintegrating public spheres. Partial
      publics do seek out dissenting opinions – not in order to take them as learning occasions
      but in a repulsive mode (Rosa, this issue). Through reciprocal references, the division of
      the audience is advanced. In addition to new possibilities for popular critique and control
      (Sevignani, this issue), the dis- and re-intermediation of public communication with its
      own ‘toxic economy of political immediacy’ (Van Dyk, this issue) also supports a ten-
      dency toward populism, which can be studied as a specific flow of communication
      streams and interplay of publics after the erosion of mass media gatekeepers.
      Commodification                                        
      The current structural change of the public sphere and its implications for democracy
      cannot be understood solely with reference to the changed technical media of dissemina-
      tion, nor solely by considering the political economy of digital media. For instance, the
      populist tendency and the rise of postfactual politics have roots in a preceding phase of
      technocratic ‘factual post-politics’ in the sense of radical politics of the market without
      any alternative (Van Dyk, this issue). It is thus the apparently deeper crisis of political
      representation, as detached from its attachment to democratic deliberation, that populism
      is working on.                                         
        In addition to (de)commodification in the sense of a displacement of the public sphere
      and communication, the commodification of the communication arenas as well as of the
      communicators must be taken into account. Thus, tendencies of political instrumentaliza-
      tion (Van Dyk, this issue) and economic exploitation of the public sphere can be observed
      not only in the workplace but also in the field of digital and social media. A qualitatively
      new characteristic of the current structural change of the public sphere, however, is a
      restriction of democracy through communicative abundance and activation (cf. Dean,
      2009; Beyes, this issue). An economic-exploitative dimension is inherent to all communi-
      cation performed on platforms that follow surveillance-based business models. In any
      case, the question that arises more urgently today is how, in a situation of communicative
      abundance, not (only) the displacement or unidirectionality of communication can be
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         13     
                                                             
       problematized but how different qualities and forms of communicative unfolding can be
       identified and evaluated. On the one hand, we are dealing with an intensification of long-
       discussed tendencies toward the commodification of the media (e.g. Cagé, 2016), but
       many commercial mass media are currently facing existential financing problems, among
       other things, because they are losing advertising revenues to digital media platforms
       whose logics are rubbing off on journalism.           
        In contrast, the extension of democracy to economic organizations and the arcane
       spheres of the digital world would act as a thrust into the ‘heart’ of the commodification
       movement: property would be less removed from co-determination and workers would
       be addressed as political subjects. From a critical public theory point of view, it would
       then not first be a matter of democratization for the workers but by the workers (Seeliger
       et al., this issue). So far, the topic of economic democracy has only been incompletely
       dealt with by narrowing it down to co-determination in companies. Not only a thorough
       reconsideration of the concepts of the proletarian public sphere (cf. Negt and Kluge,
       1993), but also challenging (maybe in the perspective of reconciliation) it with approaches
       to epistemic violence and to subaltern publics (see Seeliger and Villa Braslavsky, 2022)
       seems timely.                                         
       Globalization                                         
       With regard to the normative functions of the public sphere, the following picture emerges:
       With regard to the necessity of transparency for social introspection, globalization
       increases the complexity of social facts to the highest degree. If the functionally differenti-
       ated society – insofar as this appears to make sense at all in view of cross-border interde-
       pendencies – already represents a context that is difficult to understand in detail, even for
       observers equipped with expert knowledge, then the complexity increases even further on
       a transnational scale. The consequences concerning the validation function of public com-
       munication are ambivalent. A higher number of participants can increase the complexity
       of the constellation just as much as its potential problem-solving capacity. Thirdly, the
       expansion of the socio-spatial frame of reference requires a multiplication of the con-
       cerns fed into the public sphere, at least insofar as the increasing interdependencies are
       themselves thematized there. The fact that the mutual observation and confrontation of
       different compatriots in a cross-border context results in socialization effects that make
       transnational communitarization probable does not seem to be ruled out.
        Changes in the socio-spatial frame of reference of public spheres can be seen firstly
       in the relationship between the access of economic and political government structures
       on the one hand and the possibilities of civil society criticism and control on the other.
       While forms of government have become transnationalized and global concerns have
       become very clear, there are only rudiments of a transnationalization of the public sphere
       (cf. Nash, 2014; see Della Porta, this issue).        
        If one focuses not on governance structures but on the socio-cultural level (identify-
       ing and solving problems, including and forming opinions), the challenges of transna-
       tional publics turn out to be quite similar to the challenges of pluralization, fragmentation,
       and polarization of national publics. When national attitudes undermine cosmopolitan
       public sphere potentials and when national public spheres become increasingly socially
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      and culturally fragmented, both cases pose the overarching problem of creating success-
      ful democratic public spheres in the face of socio-cultural differentiation of audience
      members (Rosa, this issue). Globalization, one might say, also affects nation-states in
      the form of fragmentation, individualization, and singularization, and poses challenges
      to the democratic public sphere. The tension between liberal and republican models of
      society, which Habermas has dealt with but probably not resolved in his deliberative
      and procedural theory of the public sphere, gives rise to the central problem of whether
      generalizable interpretations, interests, and principles in a society should only be proven
      and formed in the public sphere, or to what degree they can or must already be
      presupposed.                                           
      ORCID iDs                                              
      Martin Seeliger https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0558-0051  
      Sebastian Sevignani https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3638-0952
                                                             
      References                                             
      Arendt, Hannah (2009) The promise of politics. New York: Schocken.
      Beyes, Timon (2022) Staying with the secret: The public sphere in platform society. Theory,
        Culture & Society 39(4).                             
      Binder, Ulrich and Oelkers, Jürgen (2017) Bildung, Öffentlichkeit und Demokratie im Wandel. In:
        Dies, S (ed.) Der neue Strukturwandel von Öffentlichkeit. Weinheim: Beltz Juventa, pp. 7–15.
      Brinkmann, Ulrich, Heiland, Heiner, and Seeliger, Martin (2022) Corporate public spheres
        between refeudalization and revitalization. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).
      Brown, Wendy 2015. Undoing the demos: Neoliberalism’s stealth revolution. New York: Zone
        Books.                                               
      Cagé, Julia (2016) Saving the Media: Capitalism, Crowdfunding, and Democracy. Cambridge,
        MA: Harvard University Press.                        
      Crouch, Colin (2004) Post-Democracy: A Sociological Introduction. Malden, MA: Polity.
      Crouch, Colin (2020) Post-Democracy After the Crises. Cambridge: Polity.
      Dean, Jodi (2009) Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism and
        Left Politics. Durham: Duke University Press.        
      Della Porta, Donatella (2022) Progressive social movements and the creation of European public
        spheres. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).            
      Dewey, John (1946) The Public and Its Problems: An Essay in Political Inquiry. Chicago, IL:
        Gateway Press.                                       
      Fraser, Nancy (2007) Transnationalizing the public sphere: On the legitimacy and efficacy of
        public opinion in a post-Westphalian world. Theory, Culture & Society 24(4): 7–30. DOI:
        10.1177/0263276407080090.                            
      Fraser, Nancy (1992) Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually
        Existing Democracy. In: Calhoun, C (ed.) Habermas and the Public Sphere (1st edn.).
        Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, pp. 109–142.             
      Fraser, Nancy (2014) Publicity, subjection, critique: A reply to my critics. In: Nash, K (ed.)
        Transnationalizing the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Polity, pp. 129–156.
      Geiselberger, Heinrich (ed.) (2017) The Great Recession. Cambridge: Polity.
      Habermas, Jürgen (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
        Category of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Seeliger and Sevignani                         15     
                                                             
       Habermas, Jürgen (2020) Warum nicht lesen? In: Raabe, K, and Wegner, F (eds) Warum Lesen.
         Mindestens 24 Gründe. Berlin: Suhrkamp, pp. 99–123. 
       Habermas, Jürgen (2022) Reflections and hypotheses on a further structural transformation of the
         political public sphere. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).
       Hartmann, Martin (2006) Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit. In: Honneth, A (ed.) Schlüsseltexte
         der Kritischen Theorie. Wiesbaden: Springer VS, pp. 168–172.
       Heming, Ralf (1997) Öffentlichkeit, Diskurs und Gesellschaft. Wiesbaden: Deutscher
         Universitätsverlag.                                 
       Luhmann, Niklas (2010) Societal complexity and public opinion. In: Gripsrud, J, Moe, H, and
         Molander, A, et al. (eds) The Idea of the Public Sphere: A Reader. Lanham, MD: Lexington
         Books, pp. 173–183.                                 
       Marshall, Humphrey T, and Tom Bottomore (1992) Citizenship and Social Class. London: Pluto
         Press.                                              
       Mill, Stuart J (1991) On liberty and other essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Mouffe, Chantal (2005) On the Political. London: Routledge.
       Nash, Kate (ed.) (2014) Transnationalizing the Public Sphere. Cambridge: Polity.
       Negt, Oscar and Kluge, Alexander (1993) Public Sphere and Experience: Toward an Analysis of
         the Bourgeois and Proletarian Public Sphere. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
         Press.                                              
       Neidhardt, Friedhelm (1994) Öffentlichkeit, öffentliche/veröffentlichte Meinung und soziale
         Bewegungen. Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 46(Special Issue
         34): 7–41.                                          
       Pitkin, Fenichel H (1967) The Concept of Representation. Berkeley: University of California Press.
       Ritzi, Claudia (2013) Die Postdemokratisierung politischer Öffentlichkeit: Kritik zeitgenössischer
         Demokratie – theoretische Grundlagen und analytische Perspektiven. Berlin: Springer.
       Rosa, Hartmut (2022) Social media filters and resonances: Democracy and the contemporary pub-
         lic sphere. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).        
       Rosanvallon, Pierre (2013) The Society of Equals. Cambridge, MA and London, England: Harvard
         University Press.                                   
       Rosanvallon, Pierre (2018) Good Government. Democracy beyond Elections. Cambridge: Havard
         University Press.                                   
       Scharpf, Fritz W (1999) Regieren in Europa. Frankfurt am Main/New York: Campus.
       Seeliger, Martin, and Villa Braslavsky, Paula-Irene (2022) Reflections on the contemporary public
         sphere: An interview with Judith Butler. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).
       Sevignani, Sebastian (2022) Digital transformations and the ideological formation of the public
         sphere: Hegemonic, populist, or popular communication? Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).
       Staab, Philipp and Thiel, Thorsten (2022) Social media and the digital structural transformation of
         the public sphere. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4). 
       Streeck, Wolfgang (2014) Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism. Brooklyn,
         NY: Verso.                                          
       Trenz, Hans-Jörg (2021) Öffentlichkeitstheorie als Erkenntnistheorie moderner Gesellschaft.
         In: Ein neuer Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit?, edited by Seeliger, M, Sevignani, S,
         and Leviathan, S (eds) 37: 383 -405. Baden-Baden: Nomos. https://www.nomos-elibrary.
         de/10.5771/9783748912187-383/oeffentlichkeitstheorie-als-erkenntnistheorie-moderner-
         gesellschaft?page=1.                                
       Van Dyk, Silke (2022) Post-truth, the future of democracy and the public sphere. Theory, Culture
         & Society 39(4).                                    
       Weßler, Hartmut, and Wingert, Lutz (2007) Der Sinn von Öffentlichkeitsforschung. In: Peters, B
         (ed.) Der Sinn von Öffentlichkeit. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, pp. 11–29.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      Martin Seeliger is a social scientist and head of the research unit on Institutional Change in Work,
      Employment and Society at the Institute for Labor and the Economy in Bremen. He works on
      topics from the field of political sociology, labour relations and cultural studies and, from 2023 on,
      as an editor-in-chief of the Journal of Political Sociology.
      Sebastian Sevignani works at the Institute of Sociology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
      Germany. His main research areas are: the structural transformation of the public sphere and
      privacy, cultural and political economy of media and communication, capitalism, sociology of
      (intellectual) property, materialist media and communication theory, and a critical theory of (infor-
      mational) needs.                                       
      This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘A New
      Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?’, edited by Martin Seeliger and
      Sebastian Sevignani.                                   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             