[PAGE 1]
 1238330                                                     
 research-article2024 TCS0010.1177/02632764241238330Theory, Culture & SocietySerafini
                                                             
                                                             
       Global Public Life                                    
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Art, Extractivism, and the           2025, Vol. 42(7-8) 105 –121
                                              © The Author(s) 2024
       Ontological Shift: Toward  a                          
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       (Post)Extractivist Aesthetics      sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462442142123388333300
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Paula Serafini                                        
       Queen Mary University of London                       
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article aims to contribute to a (post)extractivist aesthetics at a time of ontological
       shifts, meaning an aesthetics that focuses on the role of art in struggles for (post)
       extractivist worlds. First, it argues for a contextualized approach to the use of the
       extractivism framework and proposes that this framework is particularly productive
       for approaching the socio-environmental crisis due to the way it allows us to engage
       with the ontological basis of this crisis. The article then builds on empirical research
       conducted in Argentina to develop the concept of prefigurative ontological design, one
       of the key functions, it is proposed, of artistic practice in anti- and post-extractivist
       movements. In this way, the article aims to expand our understanding of the potential
       of extractivism as a framework of analysis and contributes to the theorization of the
       relationship between art and extractivism through the lens of political ontology, offering
       new concepts for developing a (post)extractivist aesthetics.
       Keywords                                              
       aesthetics, Argentina, art, design, extractivism, Latin America, ontology
                                                             
                                                             
       Introduction                                          
                                                             
       In the town of Andalgalá, in the northwest of Argentina, a local assembly has been lead-
       ing the struggle against open-pit mining for over two decades. The murals of Andalgalá
       brightly display the history of this resistance through images and slogans, and they put
       forward understandings of nature, territory and prosperity that challenge the extractivist
       development paradigm: ‘water is worth more than gold’. At the march against the G20
       summit in 2018, the collective La Ala Plástica descended upon the streets of Buenos
       Aires with a meters-tall totem of a plant native to South America. The performance, titled
       Procesión pagana del Plumero de la Pampa (Pagan procession of the Pampas Grass),
       placed plants at the centre of a struggle against neocolonialism. By means of a
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Paula Serafini. Email: p.serafini@qmul.ac.uk
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      carnivalesque, participatory celebration of a plant species considered invasive in Europe,
      the artists subverted the human-nature hierarchical dualism as well as the figure of colo-
      nized-colonizer, challenging in this way the ontological basis of the colonial project and
      of today’s extractivist model.                         
        As a phenomenon, extractivism is broadly understood as an economic model based on
      the intensive and extensive extraction of nature, mainly for export. As an analytical
      framework developed by activists and scholars in Latin America (e.g. Gudynas, 2009;
      Machado Aráoz, 2015; Svampa and Viale, 2014), it emerged as a way to make sense of
      the expansion and consequences of extractive activities beginning in the mid-1990s. In
      recent years, the term extractivism has gained popularity beyond Latin America and the
      Global South. Furthermore, while studies of extractivism have traditionally mostly origi-
      nated from the social sciences, both the phenomenon and framework of extractivism
      have gained attention in cultural studies and literary studies and criticism: recent special
      issues on extraction and extractivism in Cultural Studies (Junka-Aikio and Cortes-
      Severino, 2017) and Textual Practice (Szeman and Wenzel, 2021) are notable examples
      of this. Additionally, we have begun to see studies on the relationship between art and
      extractivism (e.g. Gómez-Barris, 2017; Merlinsky and Serafini, 2020; Richards and
      Davis-Fisch, 2020; Roesch, 2019; Rosauro, 2018; Serafini, 2022). A research avenue
      that merits further development, I propose, is that of an aesthetics for (post)extractivism;
      in other words, a project that investigates the kinds of images and sensorial expressions
      that extractivism is conducive to, and how the field of art and culture puts forward other
      aesthetics that emerge from spaces of resistance, ontological shifts, and desires for (post)
      extractivist ways of living. Specifically, my interest is with the theoretical tools we
      develop to understand the significance of such cultural practices.
        This article argues for a contextualized understanding of artistic practice in struggles
      against extractivism and for (post)extractivist futures, and proposes prefigurative onto-
      logical design as a central category for a (post)extractivist aesthetics, an aesthetics that
      situates itself in the ontological struggles of our times. To do this, the article begins by
      arguing for the use of extractivism as a contextualized framework. It then moves to a
      discussion on ontology as an element of the socio-ecological crisis, and argues that
      extractivism is a productive framework for approaching such conflicts in a way that
      considers their ontological dimension. I then discuss the potential of art for ontological
      design, building on and expanding Arturo Escobar’s proposal of designs for the pluriv-
      erse (Escobar, 2018), and applying his ideas on ontological design to the analysis of art
      and cultural practices opposing extractivism. In this way, the article seeks to advance
      current discussions on the possibilities and limitations of the framework of extractivism
      and to contribute to an aesthetics of (post)extractivism. I follow Chagnon et al. in their
      proposal that ‘developing new conceptual paradigms “beyond extractivism” and apply-
      ing them to practice, is a key social and political task in the years ahead’ (Chagnon et al.,
      2022: 21), and I argue that art and culture have a crucial role in this endeavour.
      A Note on Methodology                                  
      This piece presents a theoretical proposal resulting from several years of qualitative
      research on art and extractivism in Argentina, including multi-sited ethnographic research
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      107     
                                                             
       (Marcus, 1995) conducted between 2017 and 2019. This involved over 60 in-depth inter-
       views and informal conversations and fieldwork across the country, in large cities such
       as Buenos Aires and Córdoba as well as small towns like Vista Alegre and Andalgalá,
       located at the frontlines of extraction. Fieldwork included participant observation in
       demonstrations, cultural events, and meetings, and facilitated spaces for conversation
       and collective reflection. The research also included the analysis of artwork (perfor-
       mances, installations, paintings, and murals), social media analysis, and critical discourse
       analysis of newspaper articles.                       
        The approach to this research is situated (Haraway, 1988), and the development of
       theory is contextualized in a way that aims to understand the localized reality of extrac-
       tivism while engaging with broader questions about the meaning and implementation of
       the framework of extractivism in other contexts and at different scales. The study there-
       fore draws from and engages with aesthetics as well as political ontology and theories of
       extractivism, but proposes an understanding of (post)extractivist aesthetics that is
       grounded and emerges from the data itself (e.g. Charmaz and Thornberg, 2020).
        Reconsidering, advancing and refining our understanding of extractivism and the
       ways it can be employed in different contexts, I suggest, is crucial in allowing us to better
       grasp a conjuncture characterized by intensive extraction and dynamics of enclosure and
       dispossession across the globe (Federici, 2018). Within this, looking at the relationship
       between art, extractivism and ontology is a pressing endeavour because art is one of the
       realms in which our capacity to let go of boundaries and reimagine the world is activated;
       understanding and nourishing such practices is particularly crucial at a time of ontologi-
       cal shifts.                                           
       Contextualizing Extractivism                          
       In this study, I engage with extractivism in two ways. First, as an ongoing phenomenon
       in Latin America that originates with the colonization of the continent. And second, as a
       framework of analysis.                                
        As a phenomenon, extractivism is defined by a prioritization of the extractive indus-
       tries over other sectors of the economy, with the promise that royalties from these activi-
       ties will fund development and modernization (Svampa and Viale, 2014). The way
       extractivism has taken shape in each country presents variations: while countries like
       Colombia and Mexico have in recent decades pursued a more neoliberal approach, the
       ‘pink tide’ governments of Bolivia, Venezuela, Argentina and Brazil have emphasized
       the importance of income from the extractive industries for fighting poverty and address-
       ing inequality.                                       
        The direct effects of extractivism are many and develop at different scales. They
       include pollution and irreversible damage to ecosystems, alarming increases in human
       and other animal diseases resulting from water poisoning and direct contact with toxic
       substances, the demise of regional economies, displacement, and the trampling of indig-
       enous rights (Álvarez Mullaly et al., 2017; Aranda, 2015). In addition, the extractivist
       model is characterized by the erosion of democratic mechanisms (Machado Aráoz,
       2015), state and corporate violence against land defenders (Gudynas, 2013), institutional
       negligence and obfuscation of data (OCMAL, 2012), and the use of hegemonic media to
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      perpetuate a narrative of development based on intensive extraction and attack any form
      of dissent (Gutiérrez et al., 2020; Riofrancos, 2017). 
        The continuity of extractivist policies despite political changes, as seen in Argentina
      with changes from centre-left to right-wing and back again in the past two decades,
      demonstrates that extractivism cannot be adjudicated to one particular political pro-
      ject (Andermann, 2018) but rather is engrained in the colonial imaginary of the con-
      tinent and across different understandings of the capitalist state. This reinforces the
      relevance of the framework of extractivism in the face of changing political
      landscapes.                                            
        Although locating the origins of extractivism in colonialism, most studies of extrac-
      tivism in Latin America refer to the current period commencing in the 1990s, what some
      have termed neo-extractivism (e.g. Acosta, 2013; Svampa and Viale, 2014). Following
      decades of intensifying extraction, this model has failed to deliver on its promises of
      development: while some pink tide governments have successfully directed revenues
      from the extractive industries towards alleviating poverty, such revenues are seldom
      translated into significant infrastructural and economic transformation projects (Martín
      García, 2016).                                         
        To understand the hegemony of extractivism, we must understand how it is rooted in
      a particular modern ontology that is defined by hierarchal dualisms such as culture-
      nature. The subordination of nature to humans allows its commodification as resource
      and its careless and limitless extraction (Leff, 2004). This ontological basis of extractiv-
      ism was forcibly imposed in Latin America through colonialism and maintained in the
      social, economic and political formations that followed (e.g. most recently, the develop-
      ment paradigm) in a way that differed from other colonial projects.1 As a result, the idea
      of nature as resource, and of extraction for export as the region’s natural destiny and role
      in the global economy, became deeply engrained in national and regional imaginaries
      (e.g. Grappi and Neilson, 2018). Because these ideas surrounding nature, extraction and
      progress are deeply rooted, it would be restrictive to think about extractivism in Latin
      America as a purely economic or environmental issue. Instead, the logic of extraction
      goes beyond the contour of the extractive industries, permeating different aspects of life
      in the same way as the coloniality of power and knowledge (Quijano, 2000).
        It is for this reason that I argue that in contexts that have historically been heavily
      marked by extractivism, it is productive to extend the framework of extractivism to other
      spheres of the social. If used in a contextualized and situated manner, concepts such as
      cultural extractivism (Serafini, 2020, 2022) can be valuable for understanding how the
      logic of extraction is perpetuated in and through other economic, social and cultural
      spheres with the effect of legitimizing the extractive industries and their expansion, and
      how different dynamics of extraction and oppression connect (e.g. the urban and the
      rural, the cultural and the economic). Following this line of thought, and in their effort to
      understand the contemporary capitalist moment in Latin America and beyond, Gago and
      Mezzadra (2017) set out to uncover the ‘organic relation’ between extractivism and
      finance (p. 577), pointing to how finance extracts value from forms of social coopera-
      tion; Dahlin and Fredriksson (2017) make a related argument in reference to the extrac-
      tion of the commons in Australia. And in the US context, Purifoy and Seamster (2020)
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      109     
                                                             
       developed the notion of ‘creative extraction’ in the study of the processes of disposses-
       sion of Black towns for the expansion of white towns (p. 48).
        But while extractivism is global, and expanded approaches help us understand it in
       relation to other sectors of the economy, it does not develop equally everywhere. For
       instance, the UK is imbricated in neocolonial extractivism across the globe, but the
       effects of British companies’ extractive activities are intentionally not as present in the
       UK as they are in countries that remain in the role of ‘suppliers of nature’.2 In places like
       the US and Canada, former colonies with a different economic and political composition
       to Latin America, we can see yet a different kind of dynamic: corporations are benefiting
       from the intensive extraction they carry out abroad – including fracking and mining in
       Latin America – and at the same time corporations and governments are pushing extrac-
       tion on the territories of indigenous peoples within their borders, reproducing neocolo-
       nial extractivist dynamics at home (e.g. Preston, 2013).
        At a time of intensified extraction and of the expansion of the frontiers of exploitation,
       identifying the translocation of extractivist dynamics can be useful in studying the neo-
       colonial and imperialist nature of the global economy. However, it is paramount that in
       highlighting commonalities we do not erase the differences and singularities (Jazeel,
       2019) in how extractivism is reproduced, experienced and resisted in different contexts.
       In its original sense, extractivism serves to describe a system rooted in specific geogra-
       phies, colonial histories and histories of resistance.
       Ontological Shifts and the Extractivism Framework3    
       Many have claimed we are currently in the midst of a ‘crisis of civilization’ (e.g. Svampa
       and Viale, 2020: 19). For centuries, the hegemony of a modern paradigm that supports a
       nature-culture divide has allowed the commodification of nature as resource, and the
       global patriarchal, racist capitalist system continues to sustain and deepen inequalities at
       both global and local levels.4 Moreover, ‘the ontologies of modernity that have shaped the
       global present’ have limited ‘our ability to imagine other futures’ (Wilson, 2018: 381), so
       it is no coincidence that ‘[o]ntology came to the fore precisely at the moment the ontologi-
       cal foundations of our civilization – and the unquestioned cultural supremacy of the peo-
       ples who founded it – are seen as starting to crumble’ (Viveiros de Castro, 2015: 8–9).
        In extractive societies particularly, but not exclusively, we are witnessing an onto-
       logical shift, by which I mean an enhanced awareness of the profound differences in
       how worlds are constructed, resulting from the multiplication and intensification of
       socio-environmental conflicts that clash over the very nature of the issue at hand. In
       other words, conflicts have become less about settling matters like impact studies, dam-
       age control and compensation, and more about differences on what it is that is at stake
       in the first place (Blaser, 2009: 879; de la Cadena, 2015; Ulloa, 2015). This means that
       beyond disagreements in conceptions and parameters of valorization (Martínez Alier,
       2002), which are indeed central to extractive conflicts, we see a clash of worlds. For
       instance, as seen in mining conflicts across the Andes, it is not only that a local com-
       munity values the water coming from the mountain more than it does the gold that is
       extracted from that mountain; it is also that the community in question might inhabit a
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      110                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      world in which the position and even agency of the mountain differs greatly from its
      position in the corporation’s world. This existing tension has become more visible as
      indigenous peoples have become more organized as political actors over the past few
      decades, and it also applies to a range of actors and communities in both rural and urban
      areas. In my fieldwork, I have witnessed the articulation of the ontological nature of
      socio-environmental conflicts across different territories: in places where indigenous
      ways of inhabiting the territory are disturbed by the violent, racist advance of the extrac-
      tive frontier, as is the case in the ancestral lands of Mapuche communities, and also in
      settler communities where the devastating effects of extractivism have led to an
      increased engagement with local indigenous ontologies and given way to a complete
      rethinking of notions of nature, development and agency, as in the aforementioned town
      of Andalgalá fighting open-pit mining.                 
        Ontological struggles must thus be understood as political (Blaser, 2009, 2010). This,
      as argues Viveiros de Castro, is because               
        they imply a situation of war – not a war of words, as per the linguistic turn, but an ongoing war
        of worlds, [. . .] in a context in which the world (‘as we know it’) is imposed in myriad ways
        on other peoples’ worlds (as they know them), even as this hegemonic world seems to be on the
        brink of a slow, painful and ugly ending. (Viveiros de Castro, 2015: 9)
        Thus, the context of a crisis of civilization urgently calls for engagement with ontol-
      ogy because ontology is the route to understanding and challenging the dominant para-
      digms in our world: engaging with ontological issues opens the way for movements that
      are truly transformational on different levels (Eitel and Meurer, 2021: 4).
        Considering the above, a question that emerges is how we can engage with ontologi-
      cal matters in the study of environmental conflicts in a way that does not neglect issues
      of materiality and the exercise of power. I propose that extractivism is a productive
      framework for this task precisely because – especially as developed by Latin American
      scholars – it centres the colonial origin of extractivism and is directly concerned with
      addressing its ontological underpinnings while also challenging the current manifesta-
      tions of coloniality in extractive activities at the local and transnational levels, from the
      most blatantly violent (e.g. the persecution of Mapuche land defenders) to the most
      insidious reproductions of imaginaries.                
        The extractivism framework opens pathways for decolonial, political-ontological
      interrogations that begin by deconstructing modern hierarchical dualisms shaping
      understandings of race, gender, humanity and nature, and that highlight the existence
      of other ontologies, bringing to the fore matters of interdependence in a decisively
      political manner – which is key to avoiding the perils of idealizing relational ontolo-
      gies, as argued by Swyngedouw and Ernstson (2018). This includes, for instance, the
      centring of indigenous ontologies that enact non-extractive relations between human
      beings, non-human beings and other entities in their environments, what de la Cadena
      (2015) has translated as ‘Earth beings’. Moreover, beyond decolonial pursuits and in
      adherence to a pluriversal perspective (Escobar, 2018), the framework of extractivism
      can also give place to ontological projects emerging from other traditions that espouse
      related goals, such as questioning the limitations of humanism (Deem, 2019; Mignolo,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      111     
                                                             
       2007; Povinelli, 2016) and engaging with the affirmative ethics of posthumanism
       (Braidotti, 2018: 41).5 In such cases, extractivism is a framework that takes into
       account the multiple effects of extractivist models in a way that de-centres humans but
       does not neglect issues of oppression and the search for social justice. This is a signifi-
       cant point to make, returning to the issue of materiality, and I agree with Martín
       Arboleda in his precautionary clarification: ‘That nonhumans very often display cer-
       tain forms of agency has now become self-evident [. . .] The challenge, then, is to
       problematize the forms of violence, exploitation, racial domination, and socioecologi-
       cal suffering that are mediated by human-nonhuman agencies in modern, capitalist
       society’ (Arboleda, 2016: 368).                       
       Extractivism, Aesthetics and Ontology                 
                                                             
       In struggles against extractivism, ontological shifts are acted upon and nurtured through
       the envisioning and creation of worlds otherwise, from grand visions to everyday actions.
       Art is one of the fields in which our capabilities for envisioning and creating are enhanced,
       and as such, it is a key vehicle for resisting the advance of extractivism, and for living
       alternative worlds in the now.                        
        In recent years, numerous philosophers, artists and art theorists have grappled with
       the question of what characterizes art at a time of intense environmental destruction and
       climate crisis (e.g. Lippard, 2014). Some have attempted to define an aesthetics of the
       Anthropocene (e.g. Ballard, 2021; Davis and Turpin, 2015; Reiss, 2019), pointing for
       instance to the environmental crisis as an aesthetic event, and to the naturalization of
       pollution and destruction as part of our daily and creative aesthetic experiences (Davis
       and Turpin, 2015: 11). Others have rejected the idea of the Anthropocene altogether, and
       argued for a more explicitly political approach to understanding art in an ecological crisis
       (e.g. Demos, 2017), in line with the critiques of social scientists (e.g. Yusoff, 2018). In
       the context of overlapping social, economic and ecological crises, art can allow us to
       express ‘languages of valorization’ (Martínez Alier, 2002) that challenge the roots of
       hegemonic discourses and practices, and to activate our capacity to imagine other worlds
       and other ways of being in the world – what some refer to as worlding practices (Haraway,
       2016: 83) or world-forming (Holtaway, 2021; Nancy, 2007).
        While they advance our understanding of global phenomena, many approaches to the
       relationship between aesthetics, nature and the climate crisis are limited by adopting a
       universalist approach. But as Braidotti argues, ‘[i]nstead of new generalizations about an
       engendered pan-humanity, we need sharper focus on the complex singularities that con-
       stitute our respective locations’ (Braidotti, 2018: 53). It follows that to understand the
       motivations and workings of art in connection to anti and post-extractivist struggles in
       Latin America, it is necessary to move away from a universalist position and to think
       about aesthetics within the multiscale operating of extractivism in particular contexts.6
       For instance, Gómez-Barris (2017) offers a way of understanding such artistic and activ-
       ist practices in Latin America by focusing on their positioning with respect to the extrac-
       tivist hegemony: she speaks of ‘submerged perspectives’, those practices that put forward
       decolonial understandings of territory and life.      
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      112                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
        Following and attempting to expand such approaches, I find it necessary in further
      developing a (post)extractivist aesthetics to look at the ways that counter-hegemonic
      artistic practices directly respond to the characteristics of extractive societies and the
      moment of ontological crisis we are currently facing. In previous work I have argued that
      artists and activists respond by developing specific and localized processes and mecha-
      nisms, and that their art fulfills context-specific sociopolitical functions in the face of
      extractivism (Serafini, 2022). In this article, I develop specifically the concept of design
      as a function of artistic resistance to extractivism and as a defining element of (post)
      extractivist aesthetics, with the aim of demonstrating how artistic practice engages with
      the ontological matters outlined earlier. I do this by drawing on empirical data and build-
      ing on recent work on design, mainly Escobar’s (2018) proposal of designs for the
      pluriverse, and on political ontology. In this way, I demonstrate how the arts and culture
      can act as sites and vehicles for resistance and creation under extractive societies (in
      addition to being a contested realm in which the logic of extraction is often reproduced),
      and I specifically argue that artistic practices can enact instances of prefigurative, onto-
      logical design at a time of ontological shifts.        
      Art and Collective Cultures at the Frontlines of Extraction
      In November and December 2017, I visited the city of Córdoba, Argentina, and I was
      hosted by the collective at Revolución CC, one of the most active cultural houses in the
      city. Cultural houses, also known as collaborative houses, are spaces where artist collec-
      tives of working and middle-class mostly under-30s come together to create experimen-
      tal spaces of co-working and/or co-habitation. They function as sites of collective
      production and social and political activity, and they are self-organized in the form of
      networks. Situated in central Argentina, the wider province of Córdoba is one of the
      regions where monoculture agriculture has expanded at full speed, causing alarming
      rates of deforestation in addition to the environmental and health consequences that arise
      from the intensive use of agrochemicals for monocrop GMO agriculture (Barri, 2010).
      Native forests are cut down to make room for soy monocrops and cattle, and near the city
      of Córdoba, forests are also cut with no planning to give way to new real estate develop-
      ments, causing severe disruption to local ecosystems and significantly increasing the risk
      of landslides and floods (Gianre, 2015). At the same time, the city of Córdoba is known
      for a longstanding tension between a sizeable young and politically active population (it
      is one of the country’s largest university towns) and a repressive police apparatus that
      resorts to excessive force and persecution on a regular basis (Roldán, 2020). In this con-
      text, young artists and activists came together to cohabit and co-create, in a move that
      addresses urgent material concerns (such as growing inflation and stagnant salaries char-
      acteristic of the Argentine economy of the last decade) and a desire to build other ways
      of life in common that are different to what the extractivist logic dictates. These cultural,
      autonomous spaces ‘are changing the way that we understand and make culture from
      perspectives and practices that include alternative media, solidary economies [and] the
      construction of networks and shared knowledges’ (Orosz, 2016, my translation from
      Spanish).                                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      113     
                                                             
        The cultural houses I got to know were all different, as were the contexts in which I
       got to know them. In addition to my stay at Revolución CC, I visited another nearby
       house for a party: cultural houses often organize social events that involve live music,
       performances and/or exhibitions, which collectives take as opportunities to raise funds
       for their rent and cultural activities. People from other houses in the circuit make a point
       of attending those parties as a form of support, knowing that when they organize their
       own, others in the network will reciprocate.          
        Another house I visited, Casa 1234, was home to a silk-screen printing studio. At the
       time of my visit, members of this house were shaken up by a police search they had
       recently experienced. A series of homes and organizations, including cultural centres,
       branches of leftist political parties and even community organizations providing food to
       children, had been searched under the pretense of finding evidence linked to a case of
       destruction of property during a march against police violence in August that year. Those
       searched accused the prosecutor of political persecution (El Piquetero, 2017; Razón y
       Revolución, 2017). In this context of police persecution and violence, the artists and
       activists I spoke to opened up their practice to those affected by such violence to generate
       a collective and, as Kester (2004) would term it, dialogical form of aesthetic-political
       practice that is based on the creation of a bond of care. Visual artists and designers col-
       laborated with the families of victims of police violence to create prints, often featuring
       the faces of victims, which were then plastered all over town (Serafini, 2022). In this
       way, their collaboration was not just a form of solidarity and kin making through art, but
       it also aimed to make an intervention in the visual landscape of the city, one that engages
       with passersby, whatever their background, to make them confront and reflect on the
       reality of institutional violence.                    
        Similarly, the artists I spoke to also made prints to accompany the camps against
       Monsanto that had taken place in the nearby locality of Malvinas Argentinas a few years
       earlier. In 2012, Monsanto announced that this rural town would be the location of the
       biggest transgenic seed factory in Latin America. The announcement was immediately
       met with fierce resistance by local communities and activists that came from across the
       country to support the fight and express their solidarity, and eventually the local assembly
       of Malvinas Argentinas won the fight against the agribusiness giant (Smink, 2014). Artists
       from Casa 1234 had joined those camps and brought their printing tools with them to
       stand against the extractivism of agribusiness. From our conversations, it became evident
       that all of their artistic work was heavily centred on relationality, be that with their non-
       human environments or with the communities they worked with. When speaking of their
       work with families of victims of police violence, Manuel from Casa 1234 explained:
        We become kin with that family, we are already part of it and that limit is already broken
        [between them and] the solidary artist or the communicator or the militant. Instead, what
        emerges is kinship, and we build it with that language, which is not the language of the vertical,
        traditional political practice of political parties where there is one referent [. . .] but we build
        instead a horizontal and mutually-affective organization.7
        Another notable example of art and culture at the frontlines of extractivism is the col-
       lective mapping of Iconoclasistas, a duo made up of communications specialist Julia
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      114                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      Risler and graphic designer Pablo Ares. The duo has been facilitating mapeos colectivos
      [collective mappings] since 2008, with the aim of providing actors in social and environ-
      mental movements with cartographic tools (maps and infographics) to help them visual-
      ize the problems they are facing, the objects and distribution of conflicts, the locations of
      corporations and state forces, and in some cases also the presence of nodes of resistance
      (Iconoclasistas, 2020).8 What is perhaps most notable about the work of Iconoclasistas is
      their process. In conversation with Julia,9 one half of the duo, she told me about how they
      travel to different cities in response to calls for their skills, and facilitate spaces of collec-
      tive making where those at the frontlines of conflicts can share experiences and exchange
      ideas in a democratic space. Communities then work together towards producing an
      output that denounces the operations of extractive activities, documents their actions and
      their effects, and deconstructs ideas such as ‘natural resource’, ‘progress’ and ‘moderni-
      zation’ to instead nurture different concepts and sets of values (e.g. the ecofeminist
      notion of body-territory that breaks boundaries between human and environment and
      individual and collective). This collectivized process is not only about designing a pur-
      poseful, beautiful and effective communicative tool but also about designing forms of
      collective work and learning spaces, and in them, collectively beginning to design
      visions, aims, structures and processes for worlds otherwise. In the mapping process, the
      question of ‘what is at stake’ is put into question, mapped, conceptualized and visualized,
      to then be mobilized politically by the collective.    
      Prefigurative Ontological Design for Post-Extractivist Worlds
      Arturo Escobar draws on both political ontology and design theory to develop his mani-
      festo on ‘designs for the pluriverse’ (Escobar, 2018). Building on his perspective on the
      ontological design potential of different practices, I consider here the potential that artis-
      tic practice has for designing meaning, visions, organizational forms, economies, sociali-
      ties and structures, and the way that both the discursive and material aspects of such
      practices facilitate instances of ontological design in a context of violence, environmen-
      tal destruction and emerging ontological shifts. I understand ontological design to be
      enacted through everyday practice, in addition to specific moments of planning and envi-
      sioning. This understanding of design reclaims it as an everyday, non-specialist and
      democratic practice, as opposed to top-down, exclusionary and oppressive forms of
      design. In this sense, I adopt the perspective of practical ontology in addition to that of
      political ontology, understanding practical ontology as a ‘profoundly open-ended orien-
      tation to exploring how and by whom [. . .] worlds are performed, maintained, chal-
      lenged, transformed, or destroyed’ (Jensen, 2021: 101, emphasis in the original).
        Ontological design is, in this view, a political practice that challenges the ontological
      basis of the hegemony of extractivism by operating at different levels with a view towards
      ontological, symbolic and material transformation. The ontological design of anti- and
      post-extractivist movements is linked to an autonomous ethos – in the sense of the Latin
      American tradition of autonomous politics (Escobar, 2018) – and is also decolonial, as it
      challenges exclusionary and oppressive universalist principles of mainstream design in
      order to rethink what and how we can envision and create (Tlostanova, 2017).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      115     
                                                             
        Practices of ontological design take place in a wealth of realms, including alternative
       economies, communication, community organizing and radical pedagogies. However,
       contemporary, dialogical artistic practices – such as those described earlier – play a dis-
       tinct role in ontological design, given that, as Kester (2004) would argue, their multidis-
       ciplinary and open nature allows them to engage with different realms of the social at
       once and from a creative, constructive lens. In the collective mappings of Iconoclasistas,
       for instance, we see how a collaborative creative practice generates a space for creating
       new socialities, rethinking notions of territory and distribution of economic and social
       activity, reinventing the practice of mapping and capturing redefined understandings of
       what is at stake in a social or environmental conflict.
        Ontological design is also activated in projects that construct social and economic
       relations that resist the encroachment of a logic of extraction on everyday life, as I have
       observed during my fieldwork in Córdoba. Such material concerns emerge as ontological
       in projects that design and enact new ways of positioning ourselves in society and within
       the rest of nature. In Córdoba, the advance of extractivism and institutional violence are
       understood as two sides of one same coin, and in response, activists and artists come up
       with their own ways of resisting and overcoming such logics and everyday forms of
       violence, creating bonds that are based on an understanding and fostering of interdepend-
       ence, designing and enacting anti-extractivist relational ontologies through their artmak-
       ing, communal living and community support.           
        A common characteristic among most of the practices I encountered during fieldwork
       was the prefigurative ethos underpinning practices that aimed to design other ways of
       being, understanding prefiguration as the small-scale enactment in the now of the forms
       of living and worlds we aspire to. I thus refer to this kind of design as prefigurative onto-
       logical design. In other words, it is not just about envisioning worlds otherwise, or design-
       ing models, strategies, and processes for a future society, but rather, it is about putting
       those designs into practice in the now, in a way that enacts and models through practice
       those other worlds we want to live in. A question that follows is: how does prefigurative
       ontological design differ from the idea of prefigurative politics which scholars such as
       Maeckelbergh (2011) and Sitrin (2006) have developed in relation to social movements
       like the alter-globalization movement, Occupy, and the unemployed workers movement
       of post-crisis Argentina? The difference, I propose, is found in the particularities of the
       conjuncture, and how this conditions the aims and effects of such artistic-political prac-
       tices, as we find ourselves in a moment of ontological shifts that have altered the make-up
       of socio-environmental conflicts and put into question what is at stake.
        The category of prefigurative ontological design therefore acts as an analytical cate-
       gory fitted for this moment and place: by engaging with the ontological dimension of
       artistic practices, we can more fully understand the different levels at which they operate,
       and how they connect to wider theories and movements such as decolonization, which
       seek to challenge and denaturalize the bases of our knowledge creation practices and
       give place to other forms of knowing and doing outside the hegemonic modern paradigm
       (Gómez and Mignolo, 2012). Engaging with the potential for prefigurative ontological
       design of these practices is more important than ever at a time when ontological shifts are
       being felt, and when it becomes more pressing to rethink and reconstruct the kinds of
       relationships we hold within communities and with the ecosystems we are part of. The

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      116                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      concept of prefigurative ontological design thus contributes to theorizing a (post)extrac-
      tivist aesthetics for a situated understanding of the motivations, processes and effects of
      art that positions itself in resistance to extractivism and for the creation of post-extractiv-
      ist worlds.                                            
                                                             
      Conclusion: Toward a (Post)Extractivist Aesthetics     
      This paper aimed to advance our understanding of extractivism and aesthetics in two
      ways. In the first place, it argued for the productiveness of contextualized uses of the
      extractivism framework at a time of ontological shifts. I argued that the extractivism
      framework puts forward an inherently decolonial and political ontological perspective
      on socio-environmental conflicts and the wider ecological crisis, thus facilitating engage-
      ment with the pressing issues of shifting ontologies and the ‘crisis of civilization’.
        The second contribution concerns the study of cultural and artistic practices of resist-
      ance in extractive societies and the proposal of concepts that can contribute to a (post)
      extractivist aesthetics. A (post)extractivist aesthetics is one that intends to understand the
      aesthetics of extractivism and the processes and functions of art that engage in building
      worlds otherwise, and it does this in reference to historical, geographical, political and
      cultural contexts. This contextualized understanding of the role of art and cultural prac-
      tices is paramount to an in-depth analysis of extractivism as a moment and as a condition,
      and to fully comprehend the ways that (post)extractivist worlds are envisioned and
      enacted on a daily basis.                              
        A (post)extractivist aesthetics needs to centre ontological struggles, but it must also
      engage with material issues in its analysis of the sociopolitical function of art and cul-
      tural practices, given the urgency of extractivist violence. With this in mind, in this arti-
      cle I developed the concept of prefigurative ontological design. Looking at art as a
      practice of prefigurative ontological design, I argued, allows us to better grasp the ways
      that artistic practice can be transformational on different levels. In a context of encroach-
      ing extraction and heightened violence that has laid bare the underpinning ontological
      assumptions of an extractivist model, art allows the enactment of different ontologies,
      and it can challenge the coloniality of knowledge at the root of extractivist violence.
        In this way, the article aimed to make an intervention in how we approach the study
      of extractive societies and movements for worlds otherwise, highlighting the transforma-
      tive potential of art at a time of overlapping crises and offering conceptual tools for a
      situated understanding of the ways that it develops within extractive societies. This is
      particularly pressing at a time when the most widespread narratives about ecological
      breakdown centre on climate change but continue to neglect the longstanding forms of
      violence surrounding extractivism, and when mainstream solutions to the crisis involve
      further extraction of nature in the Global South (e.g. lithium) to sustain transition pro-
      grammes based on the assumption of continuing growth. To challenge such narratives, it
      is paramount to step back from universalist understandings of environmental struggles
      and bring forward those cultural practices that highlight the differentiated effects of a
      global extractive economy, and at the same time put forward other ways of being that
      disrupt the idea of only one possible solution to the ecological crisis.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      117     
                                                             
       Funding                                               
       This research was supported by a British Academy/Leverhulme Trust Small Research Grant.
                                                             
       ORCID iD                                              
       Paula Serafini https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4278-1832  
                                                             
       Notes                                                 
       1. In The Open Veins of Latin America, Galeano (2015) discusses the way that the extractive
         colonialism of the Spanish colonies differed from the settler model promoted by the British in
         the US. I note, however, that a distinction between exploitation and settler colonialisms is not
         always useful in the analysis of coloniality in Latin America, as recently argued for instance
         by Castellanos (2017).                              
       2. In the last decade, there have been several conflicts surrounding extraction in the UK, spe-
         cifically concerning fracking. However, it is telling that British companies like BP have not
         attempted to frack in the UK because they do not want to ‘attract the wrong kind of attention’
         (Macalister, 2014), a fact that exposes the different levels of accountability such companies
         have in different contexts.                         
       3. I use ontology as a way of referring to questions regarding the nature of being, as I am look-
         ing at the aspect of conflicts and social transformations concerned with the question of ‘what
         it is that is at stake’. The concept of ontology itself, which is contested and could be replaced
         by others, is secondary here to the issue of why and how we can engage with these kinds of
         questions and to what effects.                      
       4. It is important to note, when engaging in these kinds of ontological discussions, that ‘[m]
         odernity is not a single-headed process that now has been surpassed. On the contrary, it is
         the multi-headed internal struggle.’ (Swyngedouw and Ernstson, 2018: 10). The point here is
         about the existence of a dominant ideology based on hierarchical dualisms that emerges from
         modernity (Swyngedouw and Ernstson, 2018: 9). For more on alternative (and insurgent)
         legacies of modernity see Tomba (2019).             
       5. For a recent reflection on the commonalities and differences between decolonial theory and
         other ontologically-focused projects (specifically the ontological shift in anthropology) see
         Fúnez-Flores (2022).                                
       6. In considering universalism, I agree with Gopal’s (2019) point on the dialogical nature of
         universals and the role of anticolonial resistance in their formation. However, my interest here
         is the contemporary effects of specific universalist understandings and how we can challenge
         them by engaging with ontology through artistic practice.
       7. Personal interview with Manuel (a pseudonym), 3 December 2017.
       8. See https://iconoclasistas.net/                    
       9. Personal interview with Julia Risler, 4 August 2017.
       References                                            
       Acosta, Alberto (2013) Extractivism and neoextractivism: Two sides of the same curse. In: Lang,
         Miriam, and Mokrani, Dunia (eds) Beyond Development: Alternative Visions from Latin
         America. Quito: Fundación Rosa Luxemburg/Transnational Institute, pp. 61–86.
       Álvarez Mullaly, Martín, Arelovich, Lisandro, Cabrera, Fernando, et al. (2017) Megaproyecto
         Vaca Muerta. Informe de externalidades. Buenos Aires: EJES–Enlace por la Justicia
         Energética y Socioambiental. Available at: https://ejes.org.ar/megaproyecto-vaca-muerta-el-
         fracking-y-sus-consecuencias/ (accessed 5 January 2022).

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      118                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      Andermann, Jens (2018) Turn of the tide? Cultural critique and the new right. Journal of Latin
        American Cultural Studies 27(1): 1–3.                
      Aranda, Darío (2015) Tierra Arrasada: Petróleo, soja, pasteras y megaminería. Radiografía de la
        Argentina del siglo XXI. Buenos Aires: Sudestada.    
      Arboleda, Martín (2016) Revitalizing science and technology studies: A Marxian critique of more-
        than-human geographies. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 35(2): 360–378.
      Ballard, Susan (2021) Art and Nature in the Anthropocene. London: Routledge.
      Barri, Fernando (2010) Pueblos fumigados en Argentina: resistencia epidemiológica comunitaria
        al modelo económico de los agronegocios. Ecología Política 40: 67–72.
      Blaser, Mario (2009) Political ontology. Cultural Studies 23(5–6): 873–896.
      Blaser, Mario (2010) Storytelling: Globalization from the Chaco and Beyond. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Braidotti, Rosi (2018) A theoretical framework for the critical posthumanities. Theory, Culture &
        Society 36(6): 31–61.                                
      Castellanos, M. Bianet (2017) Introduction: Settler colonialism in Latin America. American
        Quarterly 69(4): 777–781.                            
      Chagnon, Christopher W., Durante, Francesco, Gills, Barry K., et al. (2022) From extractivism to
        global extractivism: The evolution of an organizing concept. The Journal of Peasant Studies
        49(4): 760–792.                                      
      Charmaz, Kathy and Thornberg, Robert (2020) The pursuit of quality in grounded theory.
        Qualitative Research in Psychology 18(3): 305–327.   
      Dahlin, Johanna and Fredriksson, Martin (2017) Extracting the commons. Cultural Studies 31(2–
        3): 253–276.                                         
      Davis, Heather and Turpin, Etienne (2015) Art in the Anthropocene: Encounters among Aesthetics,
        Politics, Environments and Epistemologies. London: Open Humanities Press.
      de la Cadena, Marisol (2015) Earth Beings: Ecologies of Practice across Andean Worlds. Durham,
        NC: Duke University Press.                           
      Deem, Alexandra (2019) Mediated intersections of environmental and decolonial politics in the
        ‘No Dakota Access Pipeline’ movement. Theory, Culture & Society 36(5): 113–131.
      Demos, T.J. (2017) Against the Anthropocene: Visual Culture and Environment Today. Berlin:
        Sternberg Press.                                     
      Eitel, Kathrin and Meurer, Michaela (2021) Introduction. Exploring multifarious worlds and the
        political within the ontological turn(s). Berliner Blätter 84: 3–19.
      El Piquetero (2017) Comunicado del Partido Piquetero de Córdoba, 1 September, Available at:
        https://elpiquetero.org/2017/09/01/en-cordoba-ayer-vivimos-terrorismo-de-estado/ (accessed
        24 June 2021).                                       
      Escobar, Arturo (2018) Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, Autonomy and the
        Making of Worlds. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
      Federici, Silvia (2018) Re-Enchanting the World: Feminism and the Politics of the Commons.
        Oakland, CA: PM Press.                               
      Fúnez-Flores, Jairo I. (2022) Decolonial and ontological challenges in social and anthropological
        theory. Theory, Culture & Society 39(6) 21–41.       
      Gago, Verónica and Mezzadra, Sandro (2017) A critique of the extractive operations of capital:
        Toward an expanded concept of extractivism. Rethinking Marxism: A Journal of Economics,
        Culture & Society (29)4: 574–591.                    
      Galeano, Eduardo (2015) Las venas abiertas de América Latina. Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.
      Gianre, Lucas (2015) El informe científico de la UNC que explica las inundaciones en las Sierras
        Chicas de Córdoba. UNCiencia, 18 March, Available at: https://unciencia.unc.edu.ar/medi-
        oambiente/el-informe-cientifico-de-la-unc-que-explica-las-inundaciones-en-las-sierras-

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      119     
                                                             
         chicas-de-cordoba/#%E2%80%9Clas-ciudades-estan-inundando-a-los-rios%E2%80%9D
         (accessed 25 June 2021).                            
       Gómez, Pedro Pablo and Mignolo, Walter (2012) Estéticas decoloniales. Bogotá: Universidad
         Distrital Francisco José de Caldas.                 
       Gómez-Barris, Macarena (2017) The Extractive Zone: Social Ecologies and Decolonial
         Perspectives. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.    
       Gopal, Priyamvada (2019) Insurgent Empire: Anticolonial Resistance and British Dissent. New
         York: Verso.                                        
       Grappi, Giorgio and Neilson, Brett (2018) Elements of logistics: Along the copper line.
         Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 37(5): 833–849.
       Gudynas, Eduardo (2009) Diez tesis urgentes sobre el nuevo extractivismo: Contextos y demandas
         bajo el progresismo sudamericano actual. In: Schuldt, Jürgen, Acosta, Alberto, Barandiarán,
         Alberto, et al. (eds) Extractivismo, política y sociedad. Quito, Ecuador: CAAP and CLAES,
         pp. 187–225.                                        
       Gudynas, Eduardo (2013) Extracciones, extractivismo y extrahecciones: Un marco conceptual
         sobre la apropiación de recursos naturales. Observatorio del Desarrollo 18: 1–18.
       Gutiérrez, Felipe, Riffo, Lorena, and Cabrera, Fernando (2020) Los chanchos y el ambientalismo
         falopa. Revista Crítica, 28 July. Available at: https://revistacitrica.com/los-chanchos-y-el-
         ambientalismo-falopa.html (accessed 4 April 2021).  
       Haraway, Donna (1988) Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege
         of partial perspective. Feminist Studies 14(3): 575–599.
       Haraway, Donna (2016) Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Durham, NC:
         Duke University Press.                              
       Holtaway, Jessica (2021) World-Forming and Contemporary Art. London: Routledge.
       Iconoclasistas (2020) Mapeos colectivos sobre extractivismos y resistencias en Latinoamérica. In:
         Merlinsky, Gabriela and Serafini, Paula (eds) Arte y Ecología Política. Buenos Aires: IIGG-
         CLACSO, pp. 177–192.                                
       Jazeel, Tariq (2019) Singularity: A manifesto for incomparable geographies. Singapore Journal of
         Tropical Geography 40: 5–21.                        
       Jensen, Casper Bruun (2021) Practical ontologies redux. Berliner Blätter 84: 93–104.
       Junka-Aikio, Laura and Cortes-Severino, Catalina (2017) Cultural studies of extraction. Cultural
         Studies 31(2–3): 175–184.                           
       Kester, Grant (2004) Conversation Pieces: Community and Communication in Modern Art.
         Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.       
       Leff, Enrique (2004) Racionalidad ambiental y diálogo de saberes. Significancia y sentido en la
         construcción de un futuro sustentable. Polis 7. Available at: http://journals.openedition.org/
         polis/6232 (accessed 22 March 2021).                
       Lippard, Lucy (2014) Undermining: A Wild Ride Through Land Use, Politics, and Art in the
         Changing West. New York, NY: The New Press.         
       Macalister, Terry (2014) BP rules out UK shale gas drilling – for now. The Guardian, 4 February.
         Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/04/bp-shale-gas-drilling
         (accessed 3 February 2019).                         
       Machado Aráoz, Horacio (2015) Ecología política de los regímenes extractivistas: De reconfigura-
         ciones imperiales y re-exsistencias decoloniales en nuestra América. Bajo el Volcán 15(23):
         11–51.                                              
       Maeckelbergh, Marianne (2011). Doing is believing: Prefiguration as strategic practice in the
         alterglobalization movement. Social Movement Studies 10(1): 1–20.
       Marcus, George E. (1995) Ethnography in/of the world system: The emergence of multi-sited
         ethnography. Annual Review of Anthropology 24: 95–117.

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      120                            Theory, Culture & Society 42(7-8)
                                                             
      Martín García, Facundo (2016) Postextractivismo y crecimiento en América Latina. Historias,
        problemas y desafíos hacia una agenda de luchas comunes. In: Rosales, Marcela, Garay
        Reyna, Zenadia, and Pedrazzani, Carla (eds) La espacialidad crítica en el pensamiento
        político-social latinoamericano: Nuevas gramáticas de poder, territorialidades en tensión.
        Buenos Aires: CLACSO, pp. 77–100.                    
      Martínez Alier, Joan (2002) The Environmentalism of the Poor: A Study of Ecological Conflicts
        and Valuation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.             
      Merlinsky, Gabriela and Serafini, Paula (2020) Arte y Ecología Política. Buenos Aires: IIGG-
        CLACSO.                                              
      Mignolo, Walter (2007) Delinking: The rhetoric of modernity, the logic of coloniality and the
        grammar of de-coloniality. Cultural Studies 21(2–3): 449–514.
      Nancy, Jean-Luc (2007) The Creation of the World or Globalization. Albany: State University of
        New York Press.                                      
      OCMAL (2012) En Andalgalá se nos está muriendo la población joven, 28 February. Available
        at: https://www.ocmal.org/en-andalgala-se-nos-esta-muriendo-la-poblacion-joven/ (accessed
        9 February 2021).                                    
      Orosz, Demian (2016) Casas de artistas: Revolución para todos. La Voz, 10 October. Available at:
        https://www.lavoz.com.ar/numero-cero/casas-de-artistas-revolucion-para-todos/ (accessed
        24 June 2021).                                       
      Povinelli, Elizabeth (2016) Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.                                    
      Preston, Jen (2013) Neoliberal settler colonialism, Canada and the tar sands. Race & Class 55(2):
        42–59.                                               
      Purifoy, Danielle M. and Seamster, Louise (2020) Creative extraction: Black towns in white space.
        Environment and Planning D 39(1): 47–66.             
      Quijano, Anibal (2000) Coloniality of power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America. Nepantla: Views
        from South 1(3): 533–580.                            
      Razón y Revolución (2017) Razzia de allanamientos en Córdoba, 31 August. Available at: https://
        razonyrevolucion.org/razzia-de-allanamientos-en-cordoba/ (accessed 24 June 2021).
      Reiss, Julie (ed.) (2019) Art, Theory and Practice in the Anthropocene. Wilmington, DE: Vernon
        Press.                                               
      Richards, Kimberly and Davis-Fisch, Heather (2020) Editorial: Extractivism and performance.
        Canadian Theatre Review 182: 5–8.                    
      Riofrancos, Thea (2017) Extractivismo unearthed: A genealogy of a radical discourse. Cultural
        Studies 31(2-3): 277–306.                            
      Roesch, Anaïs (2019) Propuesta para un régimen estético post etractivista. Index, Revista De Arte
        contemporáneo 7: 176–184.                            
      Roldán, Macarena (2020) Juvenicide in Córdoba (Argentina) and bio-resistance. Strategies in col-
        lective youth action. Relaciones Estudios de Historia y Sociedad 41(160): 47–65.
      Rosauro, Elena (2018) Ecologías políticas: extractivismo, sojización y deforestación en la cultura
        visual del siglo XXI. MODOS. Revista de História da Arte 2(2): 33–52.
      Serafini, Paula (2020) Cultural production beyond extraction? A first approach to extractivism
        and the cultural and creative industries in Argentina. In: Oakley, Kate, and Banks, Mark
        (eds) Cultural Industries and the Environmental Crisis: New Approaches for Policy. Cham,
        Switzerland: Springer. pp. 51–63.                    
      Serafini, Paula (2022) Creating Worlds Otherwise: Art, Collective Action, and (Post)Extractivism.
        Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.          
      Sitrin, Mariana (ed.) (2006) Horizontalism: Voices of Popular Power in Argentina. Oakland, CA:
        AK Press.                                            

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Serafini                                      121     
                                                             
       Smink, Verónica (2014) Malvinas Argentinas, la comunidad que logró frenar a Monsanto, el
         gigante de los transgénicos. BBC Mundo, 12 December. Available at: https://www.bbc.com/
         mundo/noticias/2014/12/141128_argentina_transgenicos_monsanto_vs (accessed 1 January
         2021).                                              
       Svampa, Maristella and Viale, Enrique (2014) Maldesarrollo: La Argentina del extractivismo y el
         despojo. Buenos Aires, Argentina: Katz.             
       Svampa, Maristella and Viale, Enrique (2020) El colapso ecológico ya llegó. Una brújula para
         salir del (mal)desarrollo. Buenos Aires: Siglo veintiuno.
       Swyngedouw, Erik and Ernstson, Henrik (2018) Interrupting the Anthropo-obScene: Immuno-
         biopolitics and depoliticizing ontologies in the Anthropocene. Theory, Culture & Society
         35(6): 3–30.                                        
       Szeman, Imre and Wenzel, Jennifer (2021) What do we talk about when we talk about extractiv-
         ism? Textual Practice 35(3): 505–523.               
       Tomba, Massimiliano (2019) Insurgent Universality: An Alternative Legacy of Modernity. Oxford:
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Tlostanova, Madina (2017) On decolonizing design. Design Philosophy Papers 15(1): 51–61.
       Ulloa, Astrid (2015) Environment and development: Reflections from Latin America. In: Perreault,
         Tom, Bridge, Gavin, and McCarthy, James (eds) The Routledge Handbook of Political
         Ecology. London & New York: Routledge, pp. 320–331. 
       Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo (2015) Who is afraid of the ontological wolf?: Some comments on
         an ongoing anthropological debate. The Cambridge Journal of Anthropology 33(1): 2–17.
       Wilson, Sheena (2018) Energy imaginaries: Feminist and decolonial futures. In: Bellamy, Brent
         Ryan, and Diamanti, Jeff (eds) Materialism and the Critique of Energy. Chicago: MCMPrime
         Press, pp. 377–412.                                 
       Yusoff, Kathryn (2018) A Billion Black Anthropocenes or None. Minneapolis, MN: University of
         Minnesota Press.                                    
       Paula Serafini is Lecturer in Creative and Cultural Industries at Queen Mary University of
       London. Her research is situated in the fields of cultural politics and political ecology, and her
       interests include extractivism, social movements, art activism and socio-ecological transitions. Her
       recent works include Arte y Ecología Política (co-edited with Gabriela Merlinsky; IIGG-CLACSO,
       2020) and Creating Worlds Otherwise: Art, Collective Action, and (Post)Extractivism (Vanderbilt
       University Press, 2022), which received an Honorable Mention from the Latin American Studies
       Association.                                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                          Body                     &         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                        Society                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                Editor-in-Chief:
                                             MMiikkee FFeeaatthheerrssttoonnee
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                     Editor: 
                                               Lisa Blackman 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                               Managing Editor:
                                               Tomoko Tamari 
                                   GGoollddssmmiitthhss,, UUnniivveerrssiittyy ooff LLoonnddoonn,, UUKK
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    Body & Society hhaass ffrroomm iittss iinncceeppttiioonn iinn MMaarrcchh 11999955 aass aa ccoommppaanniioonn jjoouurrnnaall ttoo
    Theory, Culture & Society, ppiioonneeeerreedd aanndd sshhaappeedd tthhee fifi eelldd ooff bbooddyy--ssttuuddiieess.. IItt
    has been committed to theoretical openness characterized by the publication of
    a wide range of critical approaches to the body, alongside the encouragement
                                                             
    and development of innovative work that contains a transdisciplinary focus.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
    journals.sagepub.com/home/bod                            
                                                             