[PAGE 1]
 1103516                                                     
 research-article2022 TCS0010.1177/02632764221103516Theory, Culture & SocietySevignani
                                                             
                                                             
       Special Issue: A New Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Digital Transformations  and           2022, Vol. 39(4) 91 –109
                                              © The Author(s) 2022
       the Ideological Formation                             
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       of the Public Sphere:              sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121110033551166
       Hegemonic,   Populist, or           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Popular Communication?                                
                                                             
       Sebastian Sevignani                                   
       Friedrich Schiller University Jena                    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This paper elaborates on a theory of the ideological public sphere in the age of digital
       media. It describes the public sphere as an initially ascending and then descending
       communication process that includes both polarising and integrating publics, which are
       organised by antagonistic media and compromise-building mass media. This framework
       allows us to distinguish between hegemonic, populist, and popular-oriented flows of
       communication, as well as register changes in the interplay of different publics driven
       by digital media platforms. Digital transformations of the public sphere give rise to
       antagonistic and networked-individualistic flows of populist communication that put
       public hegemony under constant pressure. The challenge is to find ways to strengthen
       popular communications that enable democratic learning processes and the flourishing
       of communicative competences of all citizens.         
       Keywords                                              
       capitalism, communication, experience, Habermas, hegemony, ideology, platforms,
       populism, public sphere, social media                 
                                                             
                                                             
       The rise of digital media signifies a structural change in the composition of the public
       sphere. Public communication mediated by mass media is socially selective, one-way,
       linear, centralised, and non-transparent, but through digital media it diversifies into
       participatory, interactive, net-like, decentralised, and transparent communication pro-
       cesses. Digital media enable ‘mass self-communication’ (Castells, 2007), within which
       mass and interpersonal communication are mixed, and thus many partial publics may
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Sebastian Sevignani. Email: sebastian.sevignani@uni-jena.de
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      92                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      ‘organically’ link to a public of general interest. Digital media also lower access barriers
      for different experiences to enter the public sphere. Thus, ‘lay’ communication, PR and
      (professional) journalism are intermingled in digital media, making it more difficult to
      judge the ‘quality’ of publications, for example in terms of their truth content or general-
      isability. Participants of the digital public sphere can no longer rely on the editorial pro-
      cesses and their compromise-building rules and procedures. ‘Quality’ must prove itself
      after publication, at best in public discussion. Digital outlets from the classic media com-
      panies and established organisations share attention with new influencers. Phenomena
      such as the ‘going viral’ of individual content, but also the critique of mass media cover-
      age, indicate that the (partial) publics organised by digital media continue to overlap in
      hybrid media systems (cf. Chadwick, 2017).             
        This disintermediation is about shattering the ‘gatekeeper paradigm’ that has long
      dominated the understanding of public-opinion formation. According to this paradigm,
      professionalised journalism with editorially organised news production, initially on the
      material basis of commercial financing through levies and advertising, achieved relative
      autonomy vis-à-vis the state and functioned as a decisive filtering authority in the pro-
      cess of opinion formation (cf. Herman and Chomsky, 2006). The modern mass media
      organised in this way possessed exclusive, non-public access to their sources and dis-
      seminated news to a dispersed audience that itself had hardly any feedback possibilities.
      With the rise of the internet and the channelling of digital communication through pre-
      dominantly commercial social media platforms that are based on surveillance and exploi-
      tation of communicative activity (cf. Zuboff, 2019; Sevignani, 2022), the public sphere
      is being reorganised along with the platforms that mediate it.
        While some voices perceive this process of dis- and re-intermediation of the public
      sphere as problematic because it would create a situation that overstrains the communi-
      cative competences of normal citizens – resulting in a loss of ‘epistemic editing’ (Bimber
      and Gil de Zúñiga, 2020: 710) and the dwindling relevance of truth criteria or ‘fake
      news’ or the disruption of social bonds within a fragmented public sphere where mass
      media have lost their integrative function (cf. Habermas in Czingon et al., 2020: 32f.) –
      others see positive aspects within this transformation. The popular chance that may lie in
      the now ever more relevant retrospective examination of journalistic ‘quality’ and ‘truth’
      are twofold: First, to link these criteria to one’s own world of experience. Second, a
      chance to empower oneself in the public sphere, i.e. to acquire and develop surrendered
      communicative competences and to learn ‘authorship’ instead of only a recipient role (cf.
      Habermas in Czingon et al., 2020: 32). A more diverse and more easily accessible public
      sphere may also have revitalising effects for democracies, as theories of a polarising
      public sphere (e.g. Mouffe, 2005) argue. In this paper, I make a theoretical contribution
      to disentangle the positive from the more problematic aspects that accompany the dis-
      and re-intermediation of the public sphere.            
        To start with this endeavour, the public sphere is best understood as an interplay of
      publics of different scope and reach. In its singular form it is a ‘network for communicat-
      ing information and points of view’ that ‘coalesce[s] into bundles of topically specific
      public opinions’ (Habermas, 1996: 360), where the ‘organisation of social experience’
      (Negt and Kluge, 1993: 3ff.) takes place in a topically structured communication pro-
      cess. In basic publics of interpersonal communication and direct encounter, i.e. at the

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                      93     
                                                             
       ‘encounter level’ (Gerhards and Neidhart, 1990), the functional roles between speakers
       and listeners are not yet differentiated and are constantly changing. In the middle levels
       of the ‘topic and assembly publics’ (Gerhards and Neidhart, 1990), the first functional
       role assignments are formed, there are significant speakers and explicit communication
       rules emerge. Prototypical middle publics form around associations, citizens’ initiatives,
       and social movements. In complex publics, such as those created by modern mass media,
       spokesperson roles are largely professionalised and relationships to certain sub-publics
       are well-rehearsed, whereby the audience becomes increasingly abstract and limited in
       its possibilities for action. Connecting to this multi-level model of the public sphere, I
       sketch out elements of a theory of the ideological public sphere and ask how we can use
       them to critically evaluate crucial aspects of the current digital transformation.
        The paper proceeds in three steps: The theory of the ideological public sphere is draw-
       ing from Habermasian, pragmatist, subject-scientific, and particularly hegemony- and
       ideology-theoretical perspectives (Section I). While Gramsci’s theory of hegemony con-
       ceives of publics as sites of struggles for cultural leadership (cf. Eley, 1992; Fraser, 1992)
       and outlines the necessity of consensus-creating structures, a ‘theory of the ideological’
       (Haug, 1987; Rehmann, 2013: 241ff.) can make it clear that the organisation of the pub-
       lic sphere can itself be ideological. It shifts the focus towards a critical-structural concep-
       tion of ideology. Certain directions of communication flows help to make domination
       prevail and this makes the public sphere ideological on a structural level rather than
       focusing on specific ideologies, that is, communicative content and styles processed
       within it. This structural perspective not only allows us to rethink populism as a com-
       munication phenomenon but also provides for a critical horizon beyond ideology (Section
       II). To transcend the ideological public sphere, we need a democratic process of power
       redistribution in society which depends on democratic learning processes in publics that
       foster the flourishing of communicative competences. Finally, the developed theoretical
       framework is applied and scrutinised to understand the current digital transformation of
       the interplay of publics. This changes the ideological flow of communication towards
       new forms of populist communication, putting public hegemony under constant pressure
       (Section III). The challenge is to find ways to strengthen popular communications that
       enable democratic learning processes and the flourishing of communicative competences
       of all citizens.                                      
       I Elements of the Theory of the Ideological Public Sphere
       The conceptual elements of the theory of the ideological public sphere, which parallel
       the multi-level model of the public sphere, include, first, the people’s common sense –
       which provides the frame within which experiences in antagonistic social relations can
       be made and which structures encounter publics; second, the organisation of topic and
       assembly publics on behalf of antagonistic media; third, the complex and compromise-
       building mass media; and, fourth, the cultural horizon of the bourgeois public sphere. Let
       me elaborate.                                         
        On the first level, the concept of ‘experience’ is helpful to mediate structural condi-
       tions and subjective activity which consist of passive elements of experiencing and
       active elements of processing. The reference to experiences allows for considering the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      94                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      conditions of social structure in public-sphere theory (cf. Negt and Kluge, 1993). In the
      process of experience, subjective meaning and justification mediate between natural or
      social conditions and human action. For Gramsci (1971: 326ff., 422f.), the common
      sense – as a proven, experience-saturated, and secured stock of forms of knowledge,
      thought and feeling – organises the ‘primary process of experience’. In keeping with the
      pragmatist ‘principle of continuity’ (cf. Dewey, 1997: 33ff.), it consists of sedimented
      experiences and represents the background against which new experiences can be made.
      The elements of everyday understanding are fed from different sources, such as tradi-
      tional convictions and experiences gathered in one’s own social career, patterns of life
      forms and ideas resulting from belonging to certain milieus, social groups, or different
      role expectations, as well as problems and experiences resulting from concrete contexts
      of action such as the family or at work. In addition, socially widespread interpretations
      and perceived ‘public opinion’ have an impact on it. Certain public interpretations thus
      appear plausible or subjectively agreeable, and it can be assumed that they will find
      greater public resonance if they can tie in with elements of everyday understanding and
      are able to bring several elements into a ‘coherent’ order. For example, it is possible to
      reconcile problems in the workplace with traditional knowledge of how to act and family
      values. On the other hand, it must be possible to disarticulate non-fitting elements and
      reduce their interpretability. Public spheres are then formed by those whose private
      capacity for action is experienced as precarious because they are affected by problematic
      consequences in a particular social situation (cf. Dewey, 1946: 3ff.) and who then try to
      regain or increase their agency (cf. Holzkamp, 2013: 19ff.). The public sphere thus
      becomes a problem-solving mechanism for interdependent social relations, in that it
      makes possible a reflexive distancing, an understanding of a problem or a collective
      meaning and justification, and the design of problem-solving strategies. The pragmatist
      theory of the public sphere starts with a constituent problem but leaves its emergence and
      the relation between the experience of the problem and social structures underexposed.
        While Dewey situates conflicts only between old publics representing established
      problem solutions and new problem publics, he assumes relatively homogeneous inter-
      ests within publics due to the shared constitutive problem reference. Capitalist societies,
      however, are characterised by social mechanisms – such as classification, subordination,
      exclusion, accumulation of opportunities, and exploitation – which link the happiness of
      the strong with the suffering of the weak (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007: 360ff.). We are
      dealing with antagonistic social relations between positions in capitalism’s complex
      division of labour. As an ‘institutionalized social order’ (Fraser and Jaeggi, 2018: 52ff.),
      capitalism structures subjects’ concerns and agency along intersecting ‘axes of inequal-
      ity’ such as ‘class’, ‘race’, ‘gender’ (cf. Winker and Degele, 2011). It can be assumed that
      in such capitalist-antagonistic social structures, problems arise that are interpreted
      against the background of a contradictory everyday understanding and basic publics are
      formed as a result. In these publics, experiences of conflict and related problems can
      be articulated, shared, shaped, or interpreted, and perhaps organised and mobilised
      (cf. Thompson, 1978: 149f.).                           
        In the Prison Notebooks, Antonio Gramsci describes how a class – which we might
      substitute by a group that makes certain experiences within the antagonistic social
      structure of capitalism – can ‘work their way up’ to hegemony, which means a cultural,

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                      95     
                                                             
       consensus-based leadership. This cultural leadership, alongside the occupation of the
       executive and coercive state apparatuses, becomes necessary for a stable relationship of
       domination in societies with a pronounced civil society. To succeed in hegemonic strug-
       gles for consent, social movements must connect to people’s everyday understanding by
       trying to structure it by re-hierarchising existing elements within their common sense
       (cf. Hall, 2011). Hegemony, as will be argued below, has a similar structure to the famil-
       iar multi-level model of the public sphere. ‘What is called “public opinion” is tightly
       connected to political hegemony; in other words, it is the point of contact between “civil
       society” and “political society”, between consent and force’ (Gramsci, 2011: 213). In
       their discussion of Gramsci, which leads them to ‘post-Marxism’, Laclau and Mouffe
       (cf. 2001: 65ff.) criticise that the theory of hegemony presupposes (class) identities in
       economistic terms and argue that such identifies can only emerge in discourse. I agree
       with them because political identities (classes) do not automatically follow from experi-
       ences – these would have to be organised in publics. Unlike Laclau and Mouffe, how-
       ever, I would like to mediate the distinction between the situation in the social structure
       that gives rise to experience and the cultural or ideological structures in which experi-
       ences from a certain situation are interpreted and articulated (cf. Hall, 1980) – in
       terms of a critical-pragmatist public sphere theory, but not in terms of a post-Marxist
       discourse theory.                                     
        Gramsci argues that at the start of becoming hegemonic, a sense of commonality
       emerges from the problems that arise from a group’s respective position in the production
       process. We might extend his understanding of a society’s base to a social structure that
       is divided by multiple but intersected axes of inequality. Gramsci states that from this
       sense of commonality a ‘solidarity of interests within the existing fundamental struc-
       tures’ (Gramsci, 1971: 181) may develop. If these material commonalities are organised
       successfully, specific institutions emerge which I call ‘antagonistic media’. In terms of
       content and funding, such media clearly take sides within the society’s antagonistic rela-
       tions and engage in ‘public relations’ for specific interests and organise publics around
       them. Antagonistic media certainly form basic gatekeeper hierarchies, but they offer
       their audiences the chance to develop attitudes in a collective context. Among their
       audiences, understandings and evaluations of social problems become more coherent
       and capable of generalisation. Financial resources, and cultural, and social capital are
       unequally distributed among antagonistic media, because these are still ‘organically’
       linked to positions of power in the social structure. Antagonistic media strategically try
       to influence ‘public opinion’ in their favour. According to Gramsci (cf. 1971: 5ff.), the
       linking to and the organisation of common sense is done by ‘intellectuals’ whose role is
       taken over by scientists, PR specialists, and individual journalists who produce content
       for the antagonistic media.                           
        However, to become hegemonic, a group must transcend such ‘corporate limits’
       (Gramsci, 1971: 181) to reach ‘cultural leadership’. Here, one’s own interests ‘can and
       must become the interests of other subordinate groups too’ (Gramsci, 1971: 181).
       Existing power relations can be challenged in this way by forming a political movement
       that is ‘bringing about not only a unison of economic and political aims, but also intel-
       lectual and moral unity, posing all the questions around which the struggle rages not on
       a corporate but on a “universal” plane, and thus creating the hegemony of a fundamental

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      96                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      social group over a series of subordinate groups’ (Gramsci, 1971: 181f.). In this hegem-
      onic phase, ‘equilibria’ must be continually established ‘in which the interests of the
      dominant group prevail, but only up to a certain point, i.e. stopping short of narrowly
      corporate economic interest’ (Gramsci, 1971: 181). From Gramsci’s model of ‘working
      one’s way up’ to hegemony, the functional distinction can be drawn between ‘organic
      publics’, which tend to be exclusive, directed towards identity formation, self-assurance,
      and unification, and ‘traditional publics’, which are directed towards alliances, generali-
      sation, and appropriating reinterpretations of experience. The degree of ‘organicity’
      expresses the attachment to a social group and the experiences that are structurally justi-
      fied for it.                                           
        On the way to political-cultural leadership, it is necessary for organic publicists to
      develop generalisable contents, and traditional intellectuals in mass media must be won
      over by these contents. In this process, media lose their specific antagonistic character on
      the threshold of becoming a mass medium. In this ascending process, communicative
      self-socialisation and problem-solving competences are handed over to ‘socially trans-
      cendent instances’ (Haug, 1987: 61) – and this is, in my opinion, an important extension
      of Gramsci by ideology theory.                         
        On the level of mass media, the problems of living together cannot, due to the antago-
      nistic structure of capitalist societies, be mediated and solved in life-world terms on the
      lower levels with their antagonistic media. Complex public spheres are largely produced
      by mass media and shaped by the mediating structures of journalism. Those affected
      cede their communicative self-socialisation and problem-solving competences to jour-
      nalists, who, because they ‘hover over things’ in the social division of labour, can pro-
      vide mediation for the unsolvable life-world problems. Professional rules and a
      journalistic habitus distinguish the actors in the ideological apparatuses of the media and
      communication (cf. Althusser, 2014) from the organic journalists and publicists, activists
      and PR agents in the issue and assembly publics. Mass media and their editorial offices
      are not neutral terrains but, to make a concept of critical state theory fruitful for the
      analysis of the ‘density and resilience’ of institutions of the public sphere, a ‘material
      condensation of power relations’ (cf. Jessop, 2008: 122ff.). Mass media are then compro-
      mise-building institutions for the antagonistic positions under the dominance of resource-
      strong forces. This is particularly evident in the criteria of journalistic ‘quality’ and their
      practical application. Particularly, some interests are, as ‘significant silences’, regularly
      not represented in mass media discourse. For example, an international comparative
      study of news coverage following Thomas Piketty’s much-debated book Capital in the
      21st Century identified the missing awareness that different interest groups are vying for
      dominance on distributional issues as a key blank space (cf. Rieder and Theine, 2019).
      Other voices, such as pro-worker positions, are represented in mass media but subordi-
      nated to pro-employer positions. Narratives such as, that without economic growth and
      profits, workers’ interests cannot be satisfied (via fiscal redistribution) justify this con-
      densation, which has a subordinating effect. Critiques of capitalism appear now and then
      in newspaper sections dedicated to arts and culture, but rarely or never in the business
      section or in stock-exchange news.                     
        Finally, the topography of the ideological public sphere includes not only the levels of
      experiences, antagonistic media, and the ascending and condensing communication

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                      97     
                                                             
       processes around mass media, but also compromise-forming values such as impartiality,
       a discourse free of domination, and press ethics. Such values ‘compensatorily place [. . .]
       the common over the element of division’ (Haug, 1993: 197 as quoted in Rehmann,
       2013: 258). It is from these values that mass media and the autonomy of the journalistic
       field legitimise themselves, but in this process the consensus-creating values are also
       interpreted in an influential way, i.e. in the sense of the aforementioned condensation of
       power relations. This is reflected in journalistic self-images or a ‘journalistic ideology’
       (Deuze, 2005) which is committed to the common good, objectivity in reporting, auton-
       omy, ideas of topicality and relevance, and an ethical orientation and significance of its
       own journalistic work. Concrete explanations (based on empirical research) of the fre-
       quently observed discrepancy between such self-images and their relevance for action
       within concrete journalistic practice can shed light on how institutional condensation
       processes take place, e.g. through hierarchical decision-making processes in editorial
       offices. However, the top level of these consensus-creating values forms a cultural reality
       of its own. Lower levels of the public sphere can refer to it in order to circumvent and
       challenge the existing institutional compromise structures through an alternative invoca-
       tion of the common good. Similar to the previously described process of institutional
       consolidation and compromise formation, an absorption and hegemonic representation
       of different demands and articulation of interests through values takes place here in the
       realm of the cultural. This is the level where the post-Marxist discourse theory has its
       merits within a public sphere theory that does not lose its references to critical theories
       of capitalism. A particular demand takes on the role of a universal representation order-
       ing and integrating many demands, thus ensuring the coherence of a system of meaning.
       In the process, this demand becomes an ‘empty signifier’ (cf. Laclau, 2007: 36ff.) in that
       it gradually loses its concrete content and its ‘organic’ reference to its origins within
       social groups and their specific interpretations. The chain of demands thus ordered and
       unified by an ideological value gains its always unstable unity through the common
       demarcation of its elements from an outside that negates them. The negated Other is
       thereby identified with a generalised state of deficiency. Social forces wage cultural bat-
       tles over the legitimate occupation of values and the compatibility of demands with these
       values in the ideological public sphere. With the compromise-forming values, however,
       a further level of the ideological, a ‘heavenly world’, thus rises above the ‘worldly
       heaven’ (Haug, 1987: 95) of mass media. In my view, the term ‘bourgeois public sphere’
       (Habermas, 1989: 89ff.) is, admittedly read in a subversive manner, suitable to concep-
       tualise this element of the ideological public sphere.
        According to Habermas, the bourgeois public sphere indeed was an ideology, for its
       establishment was an exclusive class project of the rising bourgeoisie. At the same time,
       it also entails an ideal or, in hegemony theory terms, an ‘empty signifier’ capable of
       organising broader social consent. The public sphere was initially limited to the bour-
       geoisie, but everyone believed they could attain this status, and the idea of the public
       sphere appealingly promised ‘the dissolution of domination into that easygoing con-
       straint that prevailed on no other ground than the compelling insight of public opinion’
       (Habermas, 1989: 88). However, the bourgeois public sphere is characterised by the fact
       that, as Negt and Kluge critically note to Habermas, in it, ‘the main struggle must be
       waged against all particularities’ (1993: 10). In it, all socio-economic differences are

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      98                              Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      abstracted in such ways that both exploited workers and capitalists appear as free and
      equal private persons. It is thus suitable as a collective term for the compromise-forming
      communicative values to which the mass media are oriented. It tends to be universal and
      balanced and can thus ideologically create cohesion in a community that, however, is
      (intersectionally) fragmented in capitalism. If one engages with it, one simultaneously
      recognises the legitimacy and equality of other positions, e.g. a trade-union position is
      seconded by an employer position. The ‘ability to talk abstractly about all situations’
      (Negt and Kluge, 1993: 48) which can be, for instance, frequently observed in political
      mass media talk shows with a ‘balanced’ cast, means that the political impulses and
      experiences that can still have an organising and mobilising effect at the lower levels of
      the public sphere are defused.                         
        As long as a relatively distinct civil society exists, the theory of the ideological
      sphere is not only sensitive to register digital transformations (cf. Section III) but
      also cultural differences in media systems, e.g. between more polarised-pluralised,
      democratic-corporatist, or liberal models (cf. Hallin and Mancini, 2014). Mass media,
      their editorial offices and individual journalistic actors represent the ‘bourgeois public
      sphere’ only to varying degrees. Thus, public broadcasting in its main formats claim a
      more adequate representation than mass media with profiled paper lines. The latter also
      act like antagonistic media in some places. Contrary to the German media system, for
      example, from the background of the US media system, which saw a ‘rise of new parti-
      san media’ (Hallin, 2019: 8), such as Fox News or (even more partisan) Breitbart, the
      autonomy and thus consensus-creating abilities of mass media may seem overrated.
      However, the suggested theoretical framework states that consensus creation is only one
      but a necessary element of the greater picture and does not anticipate its relative signifi-
      cance; rather, it allows us to register differences within the interplay of publics (shifting
      the focus on empirical research towards information and communication flows, cf. e.g.
      Gruszczynski and Wagner, 2017; Ognyanova and Monge, 2013: 84f.) and may thus
      inform a critical strand of critical media system research that compares public spheres
      cross-culturally on the mentioned four levels.         
      II Communication Flows within and beyond the Ideological
      Public Sphere                                          
      Such a model of the public sphere has the merit of being capable of identifying different
      ideal-typical flows of public communication and of using them to evaluate the quality of
      different media systems that organise the interplay of publics. Distinguishing such direc-
      tions of communication flows within the four-level structural topography may inform
      social movements’ general strategies of gaining public influence. We can identify:
        •• First, there is communication that vertically flows from the bottom to the top, that
          is from common-sense experiences organised through antagonistic media as a
          mass-media representation of the bourgeois public sphere, and then again back
          from there to organise the lower levels.           
        •• Second, there is communication that also flows vertically but bypasses intermedi-
          aries, such as antagonistic media or mass media, in order to claim the bourgeois
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                      99     
                                                             
          public sphere directly. This affects changes ‘from above’ within the consensus-
          creating mass media intermediaries as well as communication flows back from
          there to the lower levels of the public sphere.    
        •• Third, communication can also flow horizontally on the lower levels between the
          level of common sense and organising antagonistic media. Here, the ideological
          superstructure is taken back gradually.            
       The first direction of working ‘from the bottom to the top’ of the public sphere has been
       illustrated in the previous section, where I described the rise of the ideological public
       sphere as an ascending process that leaves behind the citizens in relative subalternity.
       However, as we are interested in understanding the public sphere as a dynamic interplay
       of different publics, there are at least two more directions of communication flows that
       challenge hegemony. I propose to further differentiate between populist and popular
       communication flows. Let me elaborate.                
        The structural theory of the ideological public sphere contributes to our understanding
       of populism, which is a heavily contested concept and thus open to interpretation.
       ‘Populism’ is widely used to refer to the politicisation of various social groups, some-
       times pejoratively, sometimes benevolently. The existence and perception of a crisis of
       hegemony and representation seem to be the starting point for populist strategies. Such
       strategies aim at circumventing existing instances of representation and articulate a cri-
       tique of the elites in a way that is comprehensible to broad social strata. Recently, some
       authors proposed a new take on populism, casting it as a communication phenomenon
       (cf. de Vreese et al., 2018; Aalberg et al., 2018; Waisbord, 2018). For instance, Engesser
       et al. (2017) situate populism within a model of political communication: populist actors
       (who?) have a political strategy (why?) to influence citizens and thereby use certain
       populist ideologies (what?) that are presented in a certain populist communication style
       (how?). While I think it is useful to understand populism as a communication phenom-
       enon, the theory of the ideological public sphere can complement such an actor- and
       style-centred view (e.g. anger and indignation are used for mobilisation and frequently
       these affects are channelled towards a form of charismatic leadership). It does so by its
       structural focus on the interplay of publics and communication flows and thereby zooms
       out from the populist activities within publics to the interplay of levels of the public
       sphere. The proposed new take on populism, understood as a specific direction of com-
       munication flows ‘from above’, occurs when hegemony, i.e. existing compromise for-
       mations, come into crisis and have to be renegotiated.
        The bourgeois public sphere, which is shaped by compromise-forming values such as
       impartiality, journalistic diligence, and the search for truth, can be called upon by lower
       levels of the public sphere, bypassing the current mass media representatives to bring
       about changes in the editorial offices and the compromise balances. This may start from
       the dominated but also the ruling social groups and their antagonistic media who think
       they can increasingly do without the compromise formation condensed in the mass
       media to assert their own interests more straightforwardly. If this happens on a larger
       scale, the existing hegemonic public order is in crisis. Populism aims to circumvent
       the ideological elites with the goal of replacing them because it is, on the one hand,
       an anti-establishment movement but, on the other, does not challenge the fundamental
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      100                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      consensus with the economic and political structure of a society (cf. Priester, 2017: 50).
      This is, for instance, apparent when right-wingers accuse the press of circulating ‘fake
      news’. Thereby they refer and seek to redefine values of the bourgeois public sphere,
      such as diversity, participation, balanced representation, tolerance, and truth. They intend
      to put mass media under pressure and to shift the balance of compromise condensed in
      editorial offices. Such populist narrations, although challenging liberalism, are not exclu-
      sively confrontational but incorporate liberal elements such as ‘popular sovereignty’ or
      ‘freedom of the press’ in a metaphorically twisted manner (cf. Gadinger, 2019: 142).
      Epistemological standards of public discussions may be eroded by strategies like these,
      which have serious effects to be further investigated, but I would propose that they do not
      necessarily escape the ideological structure of the public sphere. As populist flows are
      communication ‘from above’ (leaders who speak in the name of the bourgeois public
      sphere), it is important to understand that this involves only a feeling of directness for the
      citizens but no direct, multi-directional, and horizontal communication. Thus, the elitist
      status of some communicators is not challenged.        
        Stuart Hall (cf. 1980, 2011) has taken pains to qualitatively distinguish populist from
      popular social movements. In this respect, Hall’s thinking contrasts with Laclau, who
      refers positively to populism and makes no such distinction (cf. Colpani, 2021). Laclau
      tends to equate political struggle with populism and then goes on to make a critical dis-
      tinction between inclusive, open-ended populism, on the one hand, and exclusive pop-
      ulism that terminates politics, on the other hand (cf. Panizza and Stavrakakis, 2020).
      Interestingly, from the perspective of maintaining hegemony, the distinction between
      popular and populist communication is likewise irrelevant because both communication
      flows, by mobilising against the compromises condensed in the mass media, threaten the
      hegemonic structure that has been achieved. However, the challenge is in one case lev-
      elled ‘from above’ (populist communication) and in the second case ‘from below’ (popu-
      lar communication). Following Hall’s intuition, how can we differentiate between
      popular and populist communication? The theory of the ideological public sphere pro-
      vides orientation in this regard by posing two interconnected questions: is the interplay
      of publics within a society suitable to bring about more equal social relations, and which
      communicative learning processes contribute to such equal social relations?
        Antagonistic social relations give rise to the ideological sphere; thus, more equal
      social relations – that is, altering social relations in favour of the exploited and the
      oppressed – mitigate the need to transfer the process of problem-solving and reaching
      consensus on a specialised, socially transcendent, ideological level. This would also
      change the form of organising experiences through media on the second level of the
      public sphere. Antagonistic media may then become more ‘agonistic’ (Mouffe, 2002) in
      this process and part of horizontal political problem-solving. Losing their antagonistic
      quality would enable some of them to take on the role of mass media, which then, how-
      ever, are legitimised not through a counter-factual notion of the public sphere but would
      represent differences between social equals. However, the quality of the process and the
      strategies of how to approach this are crucial. Some form of public learning that organ-
      ises the contradictory common sense is necessary, which makes it impossible for the
      common sense and meaning-making of the people to remain as they currently are. It
      rather demands intermediaries that organise the common sense and thereby also

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                     101     
                                                             
       challenge the meaning-making performed by those involved to some extent. It is the
       quality of such learning processes that is decisive, especially if we assume that commu-
       nication and some forms of subjective learning are strongly interconnected. Both the
       (im)possibility and the quality of communicative learning processes within specific pub-
       lic settings are a problem that certainly needs extensive reflection (cf. e.g. Biesta, 2014).
       Here, I hope to sketch out how it can be approached from the perspective of the theory
       of the ideological public sphere. Thereby I might also contribute to sharpening the
       problem of populism as a communication-flow phenomenon by asking: which learning
       processes are involved in distinct interplays of publics?
        The emergence and permanent reproduction of the ideological, that is, the handing-
       over of communicative competences to social transcendent instances, such as consen-
       sus-creating mass media, rests on the fundamental need of subjects to gain agency at
       any given time and social situation. Agency ‘refers to the human capacity to gain, in
       cooperation with others, control over each individual’s own life conditions’ (Holzkamp,
       2013: 20). Having said this, the subject can strive for agency in two fundamentally dif-
       ferent ways: either acting under the existing conditions by accepting limits given by
       current power relations or expanding agency in cooperation (cf. also Engeström, 2015).
       As Holzkamp argues, ‘if I attempt to gain some freedom of action within given power
       relations, in a certain sense I negate this freedom myself, since it is vouchsafed by the
       particular authorities and can be rescinded at any time. In such a situation, for the sake
       of short-term security and satisfaction, I violate my general long-term life interest’
       (2013: 24).                                           
        The ideological public sphere and its typical ascending and then descending commu-
       nication flows establish a ‘competence/incompetence structure’ (Haug, 1987: 73) that
       grants subjects with agency but at the same time secures the conflict-generating condi-
       tions of antagonistic social relations in capitalism that restrict agency. By giving up com-
       municative capabilities and by not engaging in learning opportunities that are suitable to
       make the former flourish, which is a precondition to expand agency cooperatively, sub-
       jects acquire ‘abilities for subalternity’ (Haug, 2010: 1390) in communication flows
       ‘from above’. Such restrictive communicative agency allows subjects to be informed in
       everyday life and thus to have at least partial control over the social contexts that affect
       their own concerns. However, this goes along with the loss of communicative abilities
       and learning qualities such as ‘authorship’ instead of only a recipient role (cf. Habermas
       in Czingon et al., 2020: 32), to check information for truth and accuracy for example, and
       to express one’s own opinions and feelings. These withering communicative capabilities
       are, however, needed to cooperatively reconstruct and gain a picture of how society is
       structured, to understand one’s own position and situation in the social structure, and to
       organise experiences coherently in communications ‘from below’.
        By contrast, public discussion could provide the path to generalised communicative
       agency. In this case, a picture of the social context could emerge through comparison with
       the opinions and experiences of others. This is, of course, a complex process because,
       although social conditions and meanings are objectively given, they only become relevant
       to the subjects’ actions when they become premises for their own justifications for action.
       The public sphere therefore does not create direct access to understanding social condi-
       tions. In public exchange, subjects with different justifications for their own actions meet

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      102                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      under given conditions and, on this base, an understanding in the sense of a meta-subjec-
      tive standpoint can be achieved through the explication of their premises (i.e. the mean-
      ings of the conditions that are actualised in each case for their own actions). Such a
      standpoint is eventually possible because people depend on each other and live under
      connecting social conditions. Public understanding in this sense does not mean consensus;
      rather, it can also mean the clarification of real opposing interests, but it presupposes that
      the subjective justification of every action is taken seriously unconditionally, which must
      not be cut off by switching to an external perspective (cf. Holzkamp, 2013). The path to
      generalised agency is dependent on communication flows that come ‘from below’, oscil-
      late on the lower levels, but never reverse this main direction. In principle, communica-
      tion flows ‘from below’ set certain learning processes in motion, while communication
      flows ‘from above’ keep people in subalternity.        
        The short discussion of the (im)possibility and quality of different forms of commu-
      nicative learning and agency in publics leads us to a clearer understanding of hegem-
      onic, popular, and populist communication flows. Hegemonic communication flows
      provide space for an expanded learning of communicative abilities in and between
      antagonistic media aiming at the empowerment of one social group or class collaborat-
      ing with other social groups or classes to the extent of third parties. The still preserved
      antagonistic social relations, however, lead to restrictions in communicative learning at
      the latest at the point of a group or class becoming the hegemonic force. If hegemony
      rests on the exclusive representation of the bourgeois public sphere, it is bound to com-
      municative subalternity not only of those not included in hegemonic mass media but
      also of those represented but who transferred their communicative competences to
      media elites.                                          
        Popular communication flows enable forms of generalised learning of communica-
      tive abilities between antagonistic media, which then would gradually lose their antago-
      nistic character. In the end, communicative subalternity is no longer needed to gain
      agency and all people would be included in the communicative learning process.
      Popular publics have an epistemic and a praxeological value: they aim to critically
      understand relations of domination and exploitation. This includes, first, an awareness
      of one’s own position in (a fragmented) society and that one shares this position with
      others. Secondly, in popular publics one’s own entanglement in antagonistic social rela-
      tions can become evident and, based on such insights, they enable evaluative discussion
      about practices that expand one’s agency in a sustainable way, that is due to the funda-
      mental sociality of individual agency necessarily in a less antagonistic manner. Popular
      movements attempt to change the public sphere from the lower levels between common
      sense and antagonistic media. For this, experiences must be organised in a self-deter-
      mined way which includes the creation of alternative intermediaries such as clubs, par-
      ties, associations, etc. and publics organised around them. Their aim is to change social
      power relations in favour of the dominated and exploited but not to gain a new repre-
      sentation of the bourgeois public sphere. This is the case with classical hegemonic strat-
      egies that erect the ideological instead of levelling it. Popular communication is not
      primarily about invoking ‘imaginary’ polities but about self-empowerment that advances
      the formation and refinement of the needs and capacities, including the communicative
      ones, for self-socialisation.                          

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                     103     
                                                             
        Hegemonic and popular communication entail communicative learning from others
       who have different opinions and social positions, which render both of them more demo-
       cratic in this respect. However, the communicative learning involved differs qualita-
       tively according to ideological effects. In hegemonic projects ascending within the
       ideological public sphere, people learn, above all, how to identify their own interests and
       to make compromises and alliances against this backdrop. Agency can be gained by the
       disadvantaged and may be expanded. However, there is a danger this will ultimately take
       on a precarious-restrictive form, namely in such a way that there is a risk that the newly
       gained agency will be withdrawn again. A hegemonic position that has been achieved
       can be challenged again. Subjects involved in such projects learn to surrender their own
       communicative competences to others who are acting in the socially transcendent
       instances of the ideological public sphere. Or, in the case of a journalistic career, they
       gradually learn, starting from an ‘organic’ communicator, to play the role of a ‘tradi-
       tional’ communicator in the Gramscian sense. Thus, they develop a habitus that is ori-
       ented towards a counterfactually imagined common-good situation.
        Populist communication flows encourage a restricted learning of communicative abil-
       ities in antagonistic media. These media aim at the empowerment of one social group or
       class at the cost of other social groups or classes by bracketing mass media’s consensus
       creation. The preserved antagonistic social relations that depend on communicative sub-
       alternity restrict the learning process shortly after interests are organised by antagonistic
       media. Populist communication foregoes popular communicative learning and compro-
       mise-building learning processes associated with the rise in the institutions of the ideo-
       logical public sphere. Opinions and social relations among citizens do not have to
       transform, or, as Cas Mudde puts it: populists ‘do not want to change their values or their
       “way of life”’ (2004: 546).                           
        In sum, any anti-ideological movement would require a social learning process that
       fosters sustainable self-determinacy within popular communication. ‘Popular’ in this
       sense is not the strategic exploitation but the practical levelling of power relations that
       makes the populist distinction between the ‘people’ and the (media) ‘elite’ plausible in
       the first place; it aims at the ‘redistribution [of] political power downward’ (Colpani,
       2021: 14). For this, however, purely populist communication faces the problem of chal-
       lenging those inequal social relations which permanently direct communication flows
       upward into an ideological arrangement and press popular towards hegemonic or popu-
       list communication flows.                             
       III The Digital Transformation of the Public Sphere   
       Following up on the brief remarks in the introduction of this paper, we are now conceptu-
       ally prepared to ask how the critical multi-level theory of the ideological public sphere can
       be applied to understand current transformations driven by digital social media in terms
       of social integration, organisation of experiences, and flows of communication. The rise
       of digital media eroded the gatekeeper paradigm of the mass media system. However, it
       was paralleled by a re-intermediation movement through predominantly commercial
       social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, or Weibo. As ‘meta-media’ they now
       mediate between an extended range of communicators and recipients and offer a platform
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      104                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      to the multitude of antagonistic digital media and the traditional mass media, but also to
      non-organised individuals. Although players in the public sphere multiplied and some
      new players gained in importance at the expense of some of the old, the unequally distrib-
      uted attention in the now so-called ‘long-tail’ digital public sphere prevailed. How does
      this dis- and re-intermediation of the public sphere affect its ideological quality?
        On the level of mass media and social integration, the rise of digital media platforms
      is first and foremost an economic-horizontal, not an ideological-vertical re-intermedia-
      tion. This weakens the influence of consensus creation traditionally taking place in mass
      media by exercising their gatekeeping role. Surely, digital platforms organise selection
      processes and the production of relevance, but this follows a different logic. Here, selec-
      tion processes aim at specific-individual rather than general-social relevance and audi-
      ences are constructed as consumers to be satisfied rather than citizens to be informed. In
      contrast to mass media, commercial social media (currently) do not compromise and
      condense as socially transcendent ideological instances (cf. Napoli and Caplan, 2017).
      They do not have editorial offices and do not carry out quality control in the narrower
      journalistic sense; this may only be the case when forced to do so by laws, e.g. to prevent
      hate crime and to ban obviously prosecutable content. However, this is still to be politi-
      cally negotiated and to be further investigated. Newer cases, e.g. Twitter’s suspension of
      Donald Trump’s account (after he had lost the presidential election), may point in a dif-
      ferent direction and lead to ‘media capture’ (cf. Nechushtai, 2018) processes through
      platforms also in terms of ideological functions traditionally fulfilled by the mass media.
      This should be carefully observed in the future.       
        Two equally important transformations take place on the levels of antagonistic media
      and the organisation of experiences and common sense because non-organised individu-
      als have entered the public sphere via social media. Explicit and implicit algorithmic
      recommendation processes, that is filtering, sorting, and personalisation according to the
      individual’s and the platform’s commercial (and perhaps increasingly political) interests,
      determine communicative contact opportunities (cf. Stark et al., 2021). Within such filter
      bubbles, individuals, according to their preferences, may come across antagonistic media
      and mass media, which then may influence their opinion formation and co-organise
      experiences. Intersecting filter bubbles may lead to group-dynamical opinion-forming
      processes in personalised information environments, and such echo chambers that may
      take shape against alternative, contrasting perspectives or entire rival echo chambers.
      Those are often seen as hostile and thereby fulfil the function of strengthening one’s own
      position. New and old antagonistic media (and partisan mass media) grow within echo
      chambers, often at the expense of balancing mass media influence. In addition to this
      relative gain in importance of antagonistic media in the transformed interplay of publics,
      there is a second crucial transformation: the networking of private opinions. Social media
      make it possible for the contradictory common sense to step into the public sphere
      directly, which also amounts to a quantitative explosion of communicative offers. As
      private opinions, they express a common sense that is not organised through some form
      of antagonistic or balancing communicative learning. Even antagonistic and mass media
      might be networked in this individualistic way, but then they also appear on the platform
      as and next to private opinions and not as focus points of their own (echo chamber or
      balanced) publics.                                     

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                     105     
                                                             
        In this context, a sole focus on digital communication technology and the tendencies
       of aggregation, potential polarisation, quantitative explosion, and networked individual-
       ism may be sufficient to explain disintermediation within media systems but is ulti-
       mately limited to explain the quality of re-intermediation – and thus the digital
       transformation of the (ideological) public sphere in hybrid media systems. I would argue
       it is equally important to understand that the commercial character of social media plat-
       forms sets the main parameters for their socio-technological structuring or ‘curation’
       (Dolata, 2019) of communicative activity and opportunities on the platforms. Following
       this assumption, political-economy analyses (e.g. Fuchs, 2014, 2021) suggest that there
       are strong interdependencies between profit motives of social media platforms and the
       acceleration, quantitative explosion, and superficiality of communicative activity. Their
       surveilance-based business models, aiming at personalised, targeted adverstising (cf.
       Sevignani, 2022), follow supply logics which prioritise communicative stimuli that fit
       neatly into the user’s collected preferences. Additionally, attention on social media is a
       commodity (e.g. ‘sponsored stories’ on Facebook), and this favours those with large
       financial resources in the battle for attention (e.g. dominant political parties and corpora-
       tions). Existing mass and antagonistic media invest their unequally distributed resources,
       e.g. attention and money, to extend their reach by social media strategies to accumulate
       ‘communication power’ (Castells, 2007). Considering the technological foundations as
       well as the political-economic organisation of the dis- and re-intermediation of the public
       sphere, we are challenged to make sense of the connecting tendencies of the commodi-
       fied logic of accumulating attention, aggregation and potential polarisation, quantitative
       explosion, acceleration, personalisation, and networked individualism. The conceptual
       tools of the theory of the ideological public sphere may be useful in this context.
        The commodified logic of accumulating attention reproduces antagonistic social rela-
       tions by supporting the powerful and disadvantaging the oppressed and exploited. This
       results in a potentially more extreme inequality between antagonistic media and thus either
       more unequally distributed chances to reach hegemony and mass media influence or to put
       populist pressure on them ‘from above’. This is why social media, in their current predomi-
       nant capitalist form, are not likely to cause a taking back of the ideological public sphere
       and to unleash popular communication flows. Lowering barriers to engage in the public
       sphere and thus allowing for a quantitative explosion of communication paired with
       personalised content, which is social media’s aggregation logic, supports all forms of
       hegemonic, popular, and populist communication similarly. If polarisation accompanies
       aggregation, then populist communication flows are more likely triggered than hegem-
       onic or popular communication flows, as democratic learning from others with distinct
       opinions is inhibited at the same time. Social media’s acceleration makes it likewise harder
       to learn and to more likely remain on a superficial level of communicative exchange.
        In terms of the much-discussed elective affinity between social media and populism
       (cf. Gerbaudo, 2018), it is true that not all populists use social media in the same way,
       and one cannot claim that social media simply fosters populist leaders (cf. Moffitt,
       2018), but it can be argued that social media are backing populist communication flows.
       Gerbaudo suggests that ‘social media has favoured the rise of populist movements also
       because of the aggregation logic embedded in its algorithms and the way it can focus
       the attention of an otherwise dispersed people. Discussion forums on social media have

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      106                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      provided gathering spaces where the “lonely crowds” spawned by the hyperindividual-
      ism of neoliberal society could coalesce, where the atoms of the dispersed social net-
      works could be re-forged into a new political community – into an “online crowd” of
      partisan supporters’ (2018: 750).                      
        However, surveillance- and advertising-driven personalisation not only contributes to
      aggregation but also to the opposite effect of networked individualism, which gives rise
      to a new and not to be underestimated form of digital populist communication. The
      restricted learning within an antagonistic media environment is further restricted or even
      interrupted if private opinions are networked without any organisation of experience and
      common sense through antagonistic media. Not only partisan antagonistic media, which
      have found a new self-amplifying space of resonance in the social media environment,
      can now influence public opinion and the shaping of the bourgeois public sphere more
      directly by circumventing consensus creation in the mass media. Also below the antago-
      nistic media, the contradictory common sense becomes more publicly visible. Without
      the intermediation of antagonistic media and the publics they organise, there is a danger
      that the examination of journalistic quality and truth, as well as meaning-making in gen-
      eral, will only take place privately. This corresponds to communication in the mode of
      restrictive agency and a de facto acceptance of antagonistic social relations because an
      intersubjective process of understanding, with its potentially emancipatory epistemic
      and praxeological effects, is dispensed with. In this context, Jodi Dean (cf. 2009: 25ff.)
      argues that such networked individualistic communication is subjectively motivated by
      the prospect of participating in a potentially global communication context and the hope
      that one’s own contribution still makes a difference in the large number of all contribu-
      tions. In a similar vein, Gustafsson and Weinryb discuss the affinity to authority typical
      of populism. In digital communication, the charismatic leader slips into his own ego and
      its digitally mediated connective possibilities: ‘I can judge what is important, I can judge
      what is true, I can judge who and what is wrong, stupid, and bad. I am the superior judge
      of the faults of our society, and without the wish to coordinate collective action with
      respect for bureaucratic organisational processes, I can demand change at any price as
      long as I am cheering others and being cheered in return’ (Gustafsson and Weinryb,
      2020: 436).                                            
        To conclude this discussion and the conceptual probing of the theory of the ideologi-
      cal public sphere, we can state that the relative gain in importance of antagonistic media
      and networked individuals’ private opinions means that hegemonic flows of communica-
      tion are weakened and existing hegemony comes under pressure more easily in the
      hybrid media system. Hegemonic effects originating from attempts to alter the hegem-
      onic block, without taking the tedious ascending path of consensus creation and even
      without the social power relations and resource distribution of antagonistic media having
      to change accordingly, are much easier to achieve. The digital transformation of the pub-
      lic sphere gave rise to an ‘immediacy regime’ (Werner, 2018) where hegemonic forces
      must constantly react to attacks launched by antagonistic and networked-individualistic
      populist communication. Given that we cannot and, seen from a critical-emancipatory,
      anti-ideological perspective, should not counteract the participatory dimensions of disin-
      termediation and digital media, the current challenge is to develop theories, politics, and
      media infrastructures to strengthen popular communication.

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                     107     
                                                             
       ORCID iD                                              
       Sebastian Sevignani https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3638-0952
                                                             
       References                                            
       Aalberg, T, Esser, F, and Reinemann, C, et al. (2018) Populist Political Communication in Europe
         (reprint edition). London: Routledge.               
       Althusser, L (2014) Ideology and ideological state apparatuses. In: Althusser L, On the Reproduction
         of Capitalism: Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses. London: Verso, pp. 232–272.
       Biesta, G (2014) Learning in public places: Civic learning for the twenty-first century. In: Biesta,
         G, De Bie, M, and Wildemeersch, D (eds) Civic Learning, Democratic Citizenship and the
         Public Sphere. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-7259-
         5_1.                                                
       Bimber, B and Gil de Zúñiga, H (2020) The unedited public sphere. New Media & Society 22(4):
         700–715. DOI: 10.1177/1461444819893980.             
       Boltanski, L and Chiapello, E (2007) The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
       Bourdieu, P (1999) On Television. New York: The New Press.
       Castells, M (2007) Communication, power and counter-power in the network society. International
         Journal of Communication 1(1): 238–266.             
       Chadwick, A (2017) The Hybrid Media System: Politics and Power, 2nd edition. New York:
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Colpani, G (2021) Two theories of hegemony: Stuart Hall and Ernesto Laclau in conversation.
         Political Theory. DOI: 10.1177/00905917211019392.   
       Czingon, C, Diefenbach, A, and Kempf, V (2020) Moral universalism at a time of political regres-
         sion: A conversation with Jürgen Habermas about the present and his life’s work. Theory,
         Culture & Society 37(7–8): 11–36.                   
       De Vreese, CH, Esser, F, and Aalberg, T, et al. (2018) Populism as an expression of political com-
         munication content and style: A new perspective. The International Journal of Press/Politics
         23(4): 423–438. DOI: 10.1177/1940161218790035.      
       Dean, J (2009) Democracy and Other Neoliberal Fantasies: Communicative Capitalism and Left
         Politics. Durham: Duke University Press.            
       Deuze, M (2005) What is journalism?: Professional identity and ideology of journalists reconsid-
         ered. Journalism 6(4): 442–464.                     
       Dewey, J (1946) The Public and Its Problems: An Essay in Political Inquiry. Chicago, IL: Gateway
         Press.                                              
       Dewey, J (1997) Experience and Education. New York: Free Press.
       Dolata, U (2019) Privatization, curation, commodification. Österreichische Zeitschrift Für
         Soziologie 44(1): 181–97. DOI: 10.1007/s11614-019-00353-4.
       Eley, G (1992) Nations, publics, and political cultures: Placing Habermas in the nineteenth cen-
         tury. In: Calhoun, C (ed.) Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
         pp. 289–339.                                        
       Engesser, S, Fawzi, N, and Larsson, AO (2017) Populist online communication: Introduction to
         the special issue. Information, Communication & Society 20(9): 1279–1292. DOI: 10.1080
         /1369118X.2017.1328525.                             
       Engeström, Y (2015) Learning by Expanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Fraser, N (1992) Rethinking the public sphere: A contribution to the critique of actually existing
         democracy. In: Calhoun, C (ed.) Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA: MIT
         Press, pp. 109–142.                                 
       Fraser, N and Jaeggi, R (2018) Capitalism: A Conversation in Critical Theory. Cambridge: Polity.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      108                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      Fuchs, C (2014) Social media and the public sphere. tripleC: Communication, Capitalism &
        Critique. Open Access Journal for a Global Sustainable Information Society 12(1): 57–101.
      Fuchs, C (2021) Social Media: A Critical Introduction, 3rd ed. Los Angeles: SAGE.
      Gadinger, F (2019) Lügenpresse, gesunder Volkskörper, tatkräftiger Macher: Erzählformen des
        Populismus. In: Müller, M, and Precht, J (eds) Narrative des Populismus: Erzählmuster und
        -strukturen populistischer Politik. Wiesbaden: Springer, pp. 115–146.
      Gerbaudo, P (2018) Social media and populism: An elective affinity? Media, Culture & Society
        40(5): 745–53. DOI: 10.1177/0163443718772192.        
      Gerhards, J and Neidhart, F (1990) Strukturen und Funktionen Moderner Öffentlichkeit.
        Fragestellungen und Ansätze. Berlin: Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin.
      Gramsci, A (1971) Selections from the Prison Notebooks. New York: International Publishers Co.
      Gramsci, A (2011) Prison Notebooks, Volume 3. New York: Columbia University Press.
      Gruszczynski, M and Wagner, MW (2017) Information flow in the 21st century: The dynamics
        of agenda-uptake. Mass Communication and Society 20(3): 378–402. DOI: 10.1080/
        15205436.2016.1255757.                               
      Gustafsson, N and Weinryb, N (2020) The populist allure of social media activism: Individualized
        charismatic authority. Organization 27(3): 431–440.  
      Habermas, J (1989) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere: An Inquiry into a
        Category of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Habermas, J (1996) Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and
        Democracy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                 
      Habermas, J (2001) Reflections on communicative pathology. In: Habermas J, On the Pragmatics
        of Social Interaction: Preliminary Studies in the Theory of Communicative Action. Cambridge,
        MA: MIT Press, pp. 129–170.                          
      Hall, S (1980) Popular-democratic vs authoritarian populism: Two ways of taking democracy
        seriously. In: Hunt, A (ed.) Marxism and Democracy. London: Lawrence and Wishart,
        pp. 157–185.                                         
      Hall, S (2011) The neo-liberal revolution. Cultural Studies 25(6): 705–728.
      Hallin, DC (2019) Mediatisation, neoliberalism and populisms: The case of Trump. Contemporary
        Social Science 14(1): 14–25. DOI: 10.1080/21582041.2018.1426404.
      Hallin, DC and Mancini, P (2014) Comparing Media Systems: Three Models of Media and Politics.
        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.               
      Haug, WF (1987) Commodity Aesthetics, Ideology and Culture. New York: International General.
      Haug, WF (1993) Elemente einer Theorie des Ideologischen. Berlin: Argument.
      Haug, WF (2010) Kompetenz/Inkompetenz. Historisch-Kritisches Wörterbuch des Marxismus
        (HKWM). Berlin: Argument.                            
      Herman, ES and Chomsky, N (2006) A propaganda model. In: Durham, MG, and Kellner, DM
        (eds) Media and Cultural Studies: Keyworks. Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 257–294.
      Holzkamp, K (2013) Psychology from the Standpoint of the Subject: Selected Writings of Klaus
        Holzkamp. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.           
      Jessop, B (2008) State Power: A Strategic-Relational Approach. London: Polity.
      Laclau, E (2007) Emancipation(s). London: Verso.       
      Laclau, E and Mouffe, C (2001) Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards A Radical Democratic
        Politics. London: Verso.                             
      Moffitt, B (2018) Populism 2.0: Social media and the false allure of ‘unmediated’ representation.
        In: Fitzi, G, Mackert, J, and Turner, BS (eds) Populism and the Crisis of Democracy. London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Mouffe, C (2002) Which public sphere for a democratic society? Theoria: A Journal of Social and
        Political Theory 99: 55–65.                          

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Sevignani                                     109     
                                                             
       Mouffe, C (2005) On the Political. London: Routledge. 
       Mudde, C (2004) The populist zeitgeist. Government and Opposition 39(4): 541–563.
       Napoli, P and Caplan, R (2017) Why media companies insist they’re not media companies, why
         they’re wrong, and why it matters. First Monday 22(5). DOI: 10.5210/fm.v22i5.7051.
       Nechushtai, E (2018) Could digital platforms capture the media through infrastructure? Journalism
         19(8): 1043–1058. DOI: 10.1177/1464884917725163.    
       Negt, O and Kluge, A (1993) Public Sphere and Experience: Toward an Analysis of the Bourgeois
         and Proletarian Public Sphere. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
       Ognyanova, K and Monge, P (2013) A multitheoretical, multilevel, multidimensional network
         model of the media system: Production, content, and audiences. Annals of the International
         Communication Association 37(1): 67–93. DOI: 10.1080/23808985.2013.11679146.
       Panizza, F and Stavrakakis, Y (2020) Populism, hegemony, and the political construction of ‘the
         people’: A discursive approach. In: Ostiguy, P, Panizza, F, and Moffitt, B. (eds) Populism in
         Global Perspective. London: Routledge.              
       Priester, K (2017) Linkspopulismus – die andere Seite der populistischen Medaille.
         Forschungsjournal Soziale Bewegungen 30(2): 50–59.  
       Rehmann, J (2013) Theories of Ideology: The Powers of Alienation and Subjection. Leiden: Brill.
       Rieder, M and Theine, H (2019) ‘Piketty is a genius, but . . .’: An analysis of journalistic delegiti-
         mation of Thomas Piketty’s economic policy proposals. Critical Discourse Studies 16(3):
         248–263.                                            
       Sevignani, S (2022) Digital labour and prosumption under capitalism. In: Butollo, F, and Nuss, S
         (eds) Marx and the Robots: Networked Production, AI, and Human Labour. London: Pluto.
       Stark, B, Magin, M, and Jürgens, P (2021) Maßlos überschätzt. Ein Überblick über theoretische
         Annahmen und empirische Befunde zu Filterblasen und Echokammern. In: Eisenegger,
         M, Prinzing, M, and Ettinger, P, et al. (eds) Digitaler Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit:
         Historische Verortung, Modelle und Konsequenzen. Mediensymposium. VS Verlag für
         Sozialwissenschaften, pp. 303–321. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-658-32133-8.
       Thompson, EP (1978) Eighteenth-century English society: Class struggle without class? Social
         History 3(2): 133–165.                              
       Waisbord, S (2018) Populism as media and communication phenomenon. In: De la Torre, C (ed.)
         Routledge Handbook of Global Populism. London: Routledge.
       Werner, A (2018) Im Bann der Unmittelbarkeit. Über Rechtspopulismus, digitale Öffentlichkeiten
         und Hegemonieeffekte. Das Argument. Zeitschrift für Philosophie und Sozialwissenschaften
         60(4): 528–543.                                     
       Winker, G and Degele, N (2011) Intersectionality as multi-level analysis: Dealing with social
         inequality. European Journal of Women’s Studies 18(1): 51–66.
       Zuboff, S (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New
         Frontier of Power. New York: Public Affairs.        
       Sebastian Sevignani works at the Institute of Sociology, Friedrich Schiller University Jena,
       Germany. His main research areas are: the structural transformation of the public sphere and
       privacy, cultural and political economy of media and communication, digital capitalism, sociol-
       ogy of (intellectual) property, materialist media and communication theory, and a critical theory
       of (informational) needs.                             
       This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘A New
       Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?’, edited by Martin Seeliger and
       Sebastian Sevignani.                                  