[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Energy & Society                      
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                              2014,Vol.31(5)41–58
        What   Is Energy   For?                              
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2014
                                             Reprintsandpermissions:
        Social Practice   and                                
                                        sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276414536746
        Energy   Demand                         tcs.sagepub.com
        Elizabeth Shove and Gordon Walker                    
        Lancaster University                                 
        Abstract                                             
        Energy has an ambivalent status in social theory, variously figuring as a driver or an
        outcome of social and institutional change, or as something that is woven into the
        fabric of society itself. In this article the authors consider the underlying models on
        which different approaches depend. One common strategy is to view energy as a
        resourcebase,themanagementandorganizationofwhichdependsonvariousinter-
        secting systems: political, economic and technological. This is not the only route to
        take.Theauthorsdevelopanalternativeapproach,viewingenergysupplyandenergy
        demand as part of the ongoing reproduction of bundles and complexes of social
        practice. In articulating and comparing these two positions they show how social-
        theoreticalcommitmentsinfluencethewaysinwhichproblemslikethoseofreducing
        carbon emissions are framed and addressed. Whereas theories of practice highlight
        basic questions about what energy is for, these issues are routinely and perhaps
        necessarily obscured by those who see energy as an abstract resource that struc-
        tures or that is structured by a range of interlocking social systems.
        Keywords                                             
        demand, energy, social practice, social theory       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
        Despite defining energy as the ‘ability to do work’, natural scientists
        rarely comment on the kind of work that is thereby enabled or on how
        this changes. In engineering and material science, as in energy policy,
        there is a tendency to take the societal ‘need’ for energy for granted and
        to focus on methods of meeting demand more efficiently, or in a manner
        thatreducesCO emissions(Allwoodetal.,2013).Inthiscontext,andin
                  2                                          
        sofarastheyariseatall,questionsaboutthepoliticsofaccess,provision
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:ElizabethShove.Email:e.shove@lancaster.ac.uk
        Extramaterial:http://theoryculturesociety.org        
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      42                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      and supply, and the details of consumption are delegated to other dis-
      ciplines, including the social sciences.               
        This relocates but does not resolve questions about how the need for
      energy arises, or how such needs evolve. Whilst the relation between
      energy and society has been a central theme across the social sciences
      (Moellers and Zachmann, 2012; Nye, 1999; Rosa et al., 1988; Verbong
      and Loorbach, 2012; White, 1943), there are significant differences of
      approach. Rather than speaking with a single voice, explanations of
      energy demand reflect and reproduce contrasting theories of society
      and of social change.                                  
        Inreviewing some of this literature, wedistinguish between two broad
      schools of thought. We start with approaches in which forms of energy
      productionandusearetakentobeeitherthecauseortheconsequenceof
      changingpolitical,economicandtechnicalsystems.Wethenconsiderthe
      placeofenergyintheoreticalaccountsthattakesocialpracticestobethe
      ‘site’ of the social. The relation between energy and social practice is not
      one that has been explored and discussed in quite these terms before. In
      moving into this territory we suggest that energy supply and demand are
      realizedthroughartefactsandinfrastructuresthatconstituteandthatare
      in turn woven into bundles and complexes of social practice. From this
      point of view, the relation between energy and society is not defined by
      externalfactorsanddrivingforces.Instead,itisbestunderstoodaspartof
      theongoingreproductionandtransformationofsocietyitself.Ironically,
      thisbringsusbacktoadefinitionofenergyas‘theabilitytodowork’,but
      thistimewiththepossibilityofdrawingonanappropriatelysophisticated
      account of what that ‘work’ entails and how it changes.
        Deliberate efforts to reduce energy demand necessarily rest on one or
      another social theoretical account of energy, society and social change.
      Energy policies consequently foreground and marginalize different lines
      of enquiry and intervention. In bringing this article to a close we argue
      that dominant approaches sideline basic questions about what energy is
      for. We conclude with a discussion of how these questions might be
      brought back into view and of the policy implications of focusing on
      the dynamics of social practice and hence on the ‘work’ that energy
      enables us to do.                                      
      Energy and Social Systems                              
      Sociologicalinterestinresourceshasarguablywanedinrecentyears,but
      there is an established tradition that focuses quite explicitly on energy–
      society relations. In their excellent review of this field, Rosa et al. (1988:
      153) explain that early interest in the topic was inspired by thoroughly
      linear and typically deterministic narratives of societal progress. White’s
      (1943) influential article on ‘Energy and the Evolution of Culture’ takes
      just such an approach, attributing ‘vast social changes’ to methods and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             43      
                                                             
        techniques of energy conversion. White’s discussion is organized around
        a series of law-like statements including the suggestion that ‘culture
        develops when the amount of energy harnessed by man per capita per
        yearisincreased;orastheefficiencyofthetechnologicalmeansofputting
        this energy to work is increased; or, as both factors are simultaneously
        increased’(White,1943:338).AsWhiterecognizes,thisequationissome-
        times complicated by confounding factors. For instance forms of social
        and cultural organization can, on occasion, block technological innov-
        ation.InWhite’swords,‘Asocialsystemmayfostertheeffectiveoperation
        of its underlying technology or it may tend to restrain and thwart it’
        (White, 1943: 347). Whether this occurs or not, White’s basic position is
        clear: in his analysis the appropriation and use of energy features as a, if
        not the, critical factor determining the rate of societal progress.
         White’swritingnowhasadecidedlydatedfeel,butmorerecentexercises
        in modelling energy flows and patterns of resource intensity are founded
        uponstrikinglysimilarinterpretationsofthesocietalsignificanceofenergy
        and energy-related technologies. For example, concepts of urban metab-
        olismdependontracingrelationsofenergy-dependencebetweencitiesand
        their hinterlands, or between one part of the world and another. Sankey
        diagrams,widelyusedinnaturalscienceandinpolicy,representenergyin
        much the same way, plotting the relative significance of different sectors
        (e.g. industry and agriculture), and characterizing losses and
        in/efficiencies as energy ‘travels’ from primary source to end use
        (MacKay, 2009). Studies of this kind treat energy as if it were a uniform
        substance,thefateofwhichcanbedescribedandplottedwiththehelpof
        standardizedunits,forexample,joules,watts,horsepowerequivalents,etc.
         Such techniques underpin other more historical work including that
        which shows how sources and forms of energy have changed over time.
        FouquetandPearson’s(1998)reviewofathousandyearsofenergyinthe
        UK is organized along these lines, as is Sørensen’s still more ambitious
        100,000-year input–output based survey of northern Europe, from
        Neanderthal society onwards (Sørensen, 2012). Reconstructing the bal-
        ance-sheets of energy supply and demand historically, or as a means of
        showing how energy flows between one place and another, gives a sense
        of the types of fuels and resources involved, and of the efficiency, or
        otherwise, of their conversion. In the mainstream energy–society litera-
        ture, calculations like these raise further questions about how the
        resource bases of societies change and what implications these changes
        have for social order and upheaval.                  
        The Drivers of Change                                
        In White’s (1943) view, processes of organizing and converting energy
        primarily depend on technological innovation, this being something that
        appears to have a trajectory and a momentum of its own. Subsequent
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      44                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      discussions of energy-related technology take issue with this representa-
      tion of progress. For example, Nye’s book Consuming Power (1999) is
      explicitly positioned as an antidote to analyses like White’s in which
      methods of energy use and conversion figure as independent forces of
      social and cultural development. Instead, Nye contends that techniques
      of provision and supply are shaped by social conditions and choices and
      that,whileinfluencedbyformsoftechnologicalmomentum,energysystems
      are socially constructed: they could be otherwise and their development is
      not inevitable. In keeping with this approach, Nye describes some of the
      interactions involved in bringing new systems into being and reviews the
      social, geographical and organizational implications of transitions from
      muscle to water, steam and electrical power. For Nye, as for Verbong
      and Geels (2010) and Elzen et al. (2004), understanding energy-related
      innovationdependsonunderstandingmultiple,intersectingsocial,political
      and organizational systems (Geels, 2002). As these examples indicate, dif-
      ferentauthorshaveverydifferentideasaboutwhatinnovationentails,but
      the central problem for Nye, and for White, is essentially one of under-
      standinghowtechnologiesofenergyprovisionandsupplyevolve.
        Other commentators place much greater weight on economic systems,
      arguing that these have a major influence on the directions in which
      energysystemsdevelop.Forexample,FouquetandPearson(1998)conclude
      that the processes involved in allocating and converting energy are bound
      both‘byachanginggrowthrateandstructureofeconomicactivity’andby
      theconstraintsofthe‘energeticresources’themselves(FouquetandPearson,
      1998:2).Againtherearetwosidestothecoin:whilsttheusesofenergyare
      heretakentobeoutcomesofeconomicactivity,changesineconomicactivity
      are sometimes explained by changes in the ‘fuel mix’ of society. Bartoletto
      andDelMarRubioVaras(2008)makethispointwithreferencetoadetailed
      analysisofenergytransitionsinSpainandItalyoverthelast150years.They
      describe transformations in the fuel mix (especially the decreasing signifi-
      cance of wood fuel) and in total energy demand, arguing that: ‘The use of
      newenergysourcesstimulatedand,atthesametime,cameaboutasaresult
      of,theemployingofnewtechnologies,whichintheirturnhadanimpacton
      productivity,thepricesofcommodities,andtheirconsumption’(Bartoletto
      and del Mar Rubio Varas, 2008: 62). Whether it is the economy that is
      thought to drive the energy system or the energy system that is thought to
      drive the economy, the common contention is that societies are in part
      definedbythewaysinwhichresourcesareorganizedandmanaged.
        This leads some to conclude that interaction between energy and eco-
      nomicsystemsisatheartamatterofpolitics.Thisisevidentlysoforthose
      who focus on the distribution of resources (oil, gas, etc.) and the vested
      interests which surround them. Such issues are also important in Harvey
      and McMeekin’s (2010) discussion of the potential for switching from
      highertolowercarbonformsofenergysupply.Intheirview,fuelswitch-
      ing offers capitalist political economies a possible route to sustainable

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             45      
                                                             
        economic growth. However, they suggest that such developments are
        unlikely without ‘scientifically informed, politically-led and long term
        strategic innovation’, regulation and a strong dose of political will
        (Harvey and McMeekin, 2010: 11).                     
         Whilst the weight given to technological innovation or to political–
        economic processes varies, the literature referred to thus far has the
        common aim of isolating critical factors and systems that determine, or
        that are determined by, forms and patterns of energyuse. From a social-
        theoretical point of view, such explanatory schemes suppose that social
        arrangements (and hence forms of energy/use) are best understood as
        outcomes of the sorts of forces and interactions described above. This
        commitment remains important, even for those whose project is to dem-
        onstratetheinterweavingof‘social’and‘technical’considerationsandto
        document the ‘social’ organization of technological innovation.
         This is not a comprehensive review of all that has been written about
        energy–societyrelations,butitisenoughtorevealdisciplinarydifferences
        inhowenergyandsocialsystemsarethoughttointeractwithtrajectories
        of sociotechnical innovation, patterns of urbanization, divisions of
        labour, the changing significance of industrial and other sectors, and
        related forms of state and corporate power. It is also enough to demon-
        strate the societal importance accorded to energy and resource
        management.                                          
        The Implications of Change                           
        Insofar as societies depend on energy and its management, radical
        changes in energy-related technologies or in fuel mix are likely to result
        in correspondingly massive forms of social upheaval. As one might
        expect, there are numerous, typically apocalyptic, claims about the
        risks and dangers that lie ahead as resources run out, as populations
        growandasexpectationsescalate(Urry,2013).Someofthesepredictions
        may well come true. Whether they do so or not, the tendency to suppose
        thatfuture societies will besubject todramatic swings, innovativebreak-
        throughs and sweeping transformation is, in a sense, part and parcel of
        the tendency to conceptualize energy as a generic resource, the need for
        which is as self-evident as it is taken for granted. On this point it is
        intriguing to compare Urry’s view of the impending crises of energy
        andclimatechangewithWhite’scommentsonthescaleofsocietaltrans-
        formation following the industrial revolution. Urry (2010: 208) contends
        thatenergyisattheheartof oneofthemostfundamentalcontradictions
        of 20th-century capitalism. In his words, 20th-century capitalism’s
         pervasive, mobile and promiscuous commodification involved
         utterlyunprecedentedlevelsofenergyproductionandconsumption,
         a high carbon society whose dark legacy we are beginning to reap.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      46                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
        This contradiction could result in a widespread reversal of many of
        the systems that constitute capitalism as it turns into its own
        gravedigger.                                         
                                                             
      White, who was writing nearly 70 years before, does not engage with the
      contradictions of capitalism, or with issues of climate change, but his
      remarks are alike in underlining the centrality of ‘the energy situation’
      for social order:                                      
        TheIndustrialRevolutionhasrunitscourse,andwearenowenter-
        ing upon the second stage, one of profound institutional change, of
        social revolution. Barring collapse and chaos, which is of course
        possible, a new social order will emerge... The key to the future,
        in any event, lies in the energy situation. (White, 1943: 350)
                                                             
      Both assessments are of their time but, as these extracts indicate and as
      the discussion above suggests, the proposition that social systems shape
      andareshapedbyenergysystemspervadesavastbodyofsocial,political
      and economic analysis.                                 
        In all of this, that nigglingly obvious, but also annoyingly impossible
      question ‘what is energy for?’ slips out of sight. It does so because that
      question is effectively excluded by a mode of analysis in which social
      arrangements are taken to be outcomes of various systems of provision,
      politicaleconomy,resourcemanagementandtechnology.Topersistently
      ask‘butwhatisenergyfor?’,andtotakethatasthecentralquestion,isto
      takeadifferentviewofthesocial.Itistoseesocietynotasanoutcomeof
      intersectingsystems,likegeologicalforcespressingthiswayandthat,but
      as emergent from, and defined by, social practice.     
                                                             
      Energy and Social Practices                            
      We now take what is best described as a practice turn (Schatzki et al.,
      2001). Theories of practice have a long and varied history in the social
      sciences, but until very recently there has been little or no attempt to
      bring this way of thinking about social life and social change to bear on
      matters of energy. In this section we introduce and explore the relevance
      and the potential of conceptualizing energy not as a cause or a conse-
      quence of social systems but as an ingredient of the social practices and
      complexes of practice of which societies are composed. As we go on to
      show, this simple but fundamental change of orientation has significant
      consequences for those interested in understanding, analysing and influ-
      encing energy demand.                                  
        Before going further it is important to set out what we take to be
      useful and relevant features of practice theory. For us, the starting
      point is the proposition that ‘social practices ordered across space and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             47      
                                                             
        time’ should feature as ‘the basic unit of social enquiry’ (Giddens, 1984).
        In taking this approach to heart, we differ from those who mobilize
        practice-based terminology in the energy field, but who do so as a
        means of revealing differences in people’s use of energy, whether at
        home or at work (Gram-Hanssen, 2010, 2011; Hargreaves, 2011). In
        many such cases, references to practice theory are layered on top of
        projects and studies that are, in essence, designed to explain patterns of
        individual or group behaviour. In this context, to talk of practice is to
        stressthefactthatsocialmeaningsandnormsareshared,ortounderline
        the point that technologies matter and that actions are materially
        scripted. Despite claiming to adopt a practice perspective, this swathe
        of energy research does not, in fact, exemplify or depend on a theory of
        practice – at least not as defined by Giddens (1984) or as subsequently
        developedbySchatzki(2002),orbyShoveetal.(2012).Inotherwords,it
        does not take social practice as the central topic of enquiry.
         If we are to get to grips with the significance of thinking about energy
        and social practice, we need to start from scratch, and we need to do so
        by working through the energy-related implications of a handful of key
        ideas that set the practice theories in which we are interested apart from
        other forms of social theorizing.                    
        Energy as an Ingredient of Social Practice           
        Theodore Schatzki is one of the key proponents of practice theory (see,
        forexample,Schatzki,1996,2002,2006,2009,2010;Schatzkietal.,2001)
        and in what follows we make use of his work, focusing first on the con-
        tention that practices constitute what he calls the ‘site’ of the social, and
        then on his closely related analysis of materiality, material arrangements
        and social life.                                     
         Before going into detail, we begin by recognizing that energy is used
        not for its own sake but as part of, and in the course of, accomplishing
        socialpractices,examplesofwhichmightincludecooking,commutingto
        work,watchingTVorconductingmeetings(Warde,2005).Havingmade
        this link between energy and practice, we suggest that understanding
        trends and patterns in energy demand (and in provision and supply as
        well)isinessenceamatterofunderstandinghowsocialpracticesdevelop,
        change and intersect.                                
         On this point, Schatzki develops a coherent and distinctive explan-
        ation of change and order that is rooted in an analysis of practice. In
        brief, he suggests that accounting for change is not a matter of abstract-
        ing sets of forces orsystems (e.g. of technology, economics, politics, etc.)
        but of detailing precisely how social practices, and bundles and constel-
        lations of practice, hang together, and of identifying the material and
        other arrangements amidst which they ‘transpire’, and which they also
        sustain and reproduce.                               
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      48                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
        Thisisconsistentwithhisrepresentationofpracticesasthe‘site’ofthe
      social. To explain, Schatzki takes social practices to be nexuses of saying
      and doing. He writes about social practices as recognizable blocks or
      patterns of activity that are filled out and enacted by practitioners, that
      is,bythosewhodo,andwho,intheenactmentandperformanceofthese
      doings reproduce, transform and perpetuate the practices they carry (see
      also Shove et al., 2012). In his words:                
        Human coexistence is inherently tied, not just to practices but also
        to material arrangements. Indeed, social life, as indicated, always
        transpiresaspartofameshofpracticesandarrangements:practices
        are carried on amid and determinative of, while also dependent on
        and altered by, material arrangements. I call the practice-
        arrangement nexuses, as inherently part of which human existence
        transpires, sites of the social. (Schatzki, 2010: 130, emphasis in
                                                             
        original)                                            
      Given that societies are defined by this hanging-together of practice-
      arrangement bundles, it is appropriate to conclude that social order
      and change are largely ‘established in practices’ (Schatzki, 2002: 110).
      As indicated above, this argues for explanations of social phenomena
      that are grounded in the ‘specifics of pertinent practice-arrangement
      nexuses and the events that happen to them’ (Schatzki, 2010: 146),
      rather than in generalized claims regarding the impact and influence of
      abstract systems, be they technological, economic or political.
        Put simply, Schatzki’s account of social practice provides us with a
      way of conceptualizing the ‘work’ (broadly defined to include bundles
      andconstellationsofsayingsanddoings)thatgoesonwithinsociety,and
      hence of conceptualizing and addressing basic questions about what
      energy is for. More than that, such an account argues for an analysis
      of energy that starts with and that is inseparable from an analysis of the
      dynamics of social practice (Shove et al., 2012). From this point of view,
      understanding energyis first and foremost a matterof understanding the
      sets of practice that are enacted, reproduced and transformed in any one
      society, and of understanding how material arrangements, including
      forms of energy, constitute dimensions of practice.    
      Material Arrangements, Energy and Social Practice      
      Practices are not purely social phenomena in that much of social life is
      intertwined with what Latour refers to as the ‘masses’, here meaning the
      huge range of material infrastructures, devices and artefacts that
      co-constitute and configure so much of what we do (Latour, 1992).
      Schatzki (2002: 23) makes a very similar point, arguing that:
      ‘The arrangements amidst which practices are enacted are not only
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             49      
                                                             
        social: arrangements include substances of all kinds, including natural
        phenomena along with man-made fabrications.’         
         Since ‘material arrangements are in some sense crystallisations of
        matter-energy flows’ (Schatzki, 2010: 137), sources of energy – wood,
        coal, oil, etc. – along with technologies of conversion and use (stoves,
        boilers, cars, etc.) qualify as part of such arrangements, but they do so
        only in relation to specific practices. This is an important observation.
        Conceptualizing energy as and as part of the material arrangements
        within which certain practices go on undermines the value and relevance
        of trying to analyse or characterize energy systems in general. This is
        because material arrangements including fuels and configurations of
        matter and energy only have meaning within, and in relation to, the
        practices in which they are enfolded and through which they are
        reproduced.                                          
         Though not inspired by theories of practice as such, Hughes’ (1983)
        classic discussion of emerging networks of power depends on a strikingly
        similar analysis of the close coupling not only of supply and demand but
        of infrastructures and practices. Hughes writes about how electricity sys-
        tems were built and about how this depended on deliberate and quite
        successful attempts to redefine a range of everyday practices such that
        electricity became a normal and necessary part of doing things like light-
        ing,cookingandheating.Itisplainlyobviousthatwithoutmovesofthis
        kind there would be no ‘need’ for electricity at all. It is also obvious that
        people do not consume energy as such: rather, patterns of energy con-
        sumption depend on a series of historically specific conjunctions of tech-
        nologies (wiring, light bulbs, etc.) and practices (illuminating rooms,
        reading at night) and constellations of practice, many of which are
        now disconnected from seasonal variations in daylight.
         Turning to another sector, petrol-based systems of automobility
        require the continual, relatively faithful reproduction of an entire com-
        plex of variously interdependent practices, ranging from oil exploration
        through to garage forecourt operation, traffic management and driving
        itself. If these practices did not ‘hang together’ in the way they do today,
        the oil system that is thereby constituted and sustained would, of neces-
        sity, take some other form.                          
         Giventhatthesalienceorotherwiseofoil,steamorelectricpowerisso
        thoroughly inseparable from specific bundles and complexes of social
        practices, there is no reason to suppose that energy has any special
        status as the driver of practice. Likewise, it makes no sense to treat
        energy and energy-related technologies as the defining features of a
        series of epoch-making transformations, as was the case in White’s
        (1943) discussion of energy and the evolution of culture. From this
        point of view, methods of studying energy in the abstract, for example,
        by quantifying energy flows in joules or units of horsepower, are just as
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      50                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      problematic in that they depend on splitting ‘energy’ out of the practices
      in and of which it is a part.                          
        That said, there is some value in making an analytic distinction
      between material arrangements on the one hand and social practices
      on the other (Schatzki, 2010). For one thing, this distinction allows us
      torecognizeandconsiderthedifferenttemporalitiesatstake.Ineveryday
      life, the enactment of any one practice (for example, cooking a meal or
      travellingtowork)typicallydependsonthepriorexistenceandavailabil-
      ity of a range of energy sources (gas, electricity, oil), infrastructures
      (grids, pipes, roads) and devices (cookers, cars, bicycles). Schatzki
      (2006) consequently suggests that whereas practices ‘happen’ (in the pre-
      sent), material arrangements and infrastructures ‘exist’, meaning that
      they endure and persist for longer than any one instance of performance
      or moment of enactment. Second, distinguishing between material
      arrangements and practices allows us to acknowledge that past and pre-
      sent infrastructures are frequently implicated in the enactment of several
      practices at once: for example, roads feature as material arrangements
      amidst which the diverse practices of walking, cycling, driving and horse
      riding all go on. Third, material arrangements have a forward-looking
      aspect, simultaneously shaping the happening of present practices and
      hence the configuration both of material arrangements and of practices
      that do not yet exist but that might do so in the future.
        As Schatzki (2011: 10) explains:                     
        Materialarrangementsubiquitouslyprefigurepractices–thatis,the
        continued happening of the doings and sayings that compose spe-
        cificpractice–bymakingsomeactions,interalia,easierandharder
        or more direct or circuitous than others. Arrangements also prefig-
        ure changes in practices and arrangements. For example, existing
        coal company arrangements prefigure changes in company oper-
        ations, making possible changes easier or harder, more or less
        expensive, more or less time consuming, and so on. Existing mater-
        ial infrastructures in the coal electricity regime also prefigure
        changes in these infrastructures or in the introduction of new ones
        (tied to alternative practice-arrangement bundles).  
      This is not simply a matter of recognizing what Nye and Hughes refer to
      as ‘technological momentum’, nor isit onlya question of acknowledging
      the path dependence of complex and distributed infrastructures at the
      level of power supply, engineering and design. The additional step is to
      explain that processes of prefiguring only occur and only have effect in
      and through the trajectories or ‘lives’ of specific social practices. Inother
      words, whilst there is value in discussing ‘material arrangements’ aside
      from practice, it is wrong to treat these arrangements as externalized
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             51      
                                                             
        contextual factors that have some sort of independent power of their
        own. There is, then, a very real sense in which what counts as context
        itselfdependsonthespecificpracticesandbundles/constellationsofprac-
        tice that are contextualized, hence Schatzki’s conclusion that ‘a context
        has composition, the precise character of which varies with the entities
        andphenomenathatexistincontext’(Schatzki,2002:63).Morestraight-
        forwardly, it is vital to remember that material arrangements are them-
        selves made, reproduced and transformed through and as part of
        happening practices.                                 
         Drawing these threads together, understanding energy–society rela-
        tions depends on understanding the range of practices, material arrange-
        ments and social orders in which energy is immersed, and on showing
        how material arrangements and energy flows are implicated in the con-
        stitution and prefiguring of practices and hence of social order/society.
        From this point of view, an account of energy–society relations is, in
        effect,anaccountofhow‘humantransformationsofnature,responsesto
        nature and artefact maintenance all transpire as moments of industrial,
        housing, scientific, informational, medical, and hobby (etc) practices’
        (Schatzki, 2002: 262).                               
         Incontrast to styles of analysis which attribute change to one ormore
        driving forces, or which consider the production and consumption of
        energy as a generic resource, conceptualizing energy as an ingredient of
        specific social practices provides a means of radically reframing contem-
        porary approaches to energy policy and sustainability. It does so in that
        it situates energy demandas part of,and as in noway separatefrom, the
        dynamics of social practice. In this, it provides a means of reinstating
        fundamental questions about what energy is for. In the same move,
        redefining the energy–society agenda in these terms makes it possible –
        indeed necessary – to mobilize a much wider range of social theoretical
        resources than is usually the case.                  
        Social Theory and Energy Policy                      
                                                             
        Dominant approaches in energy research and policy reproduce resource-
        based,systemsstylethinking,emphasizingquestionsthathavetodowith
        efficiency of conversion and supply, with the price of fuel or with con-
        sumers’viewsaboutenergyandtheirattitudestowardsconsumptionand
        conservation(Parkhilletal.,2013).Thesestrategiesofanalysisandinter-
        vention depend on forcibly disconnecting a discussion of ‘energy’ from a
        discussion of social practice: a necessary step if ‘energy’ is to be consti-
        tuted as a topic in its own right. The problem is that this same move
        ensures that debates about energy futures routinely proceed without ref-
        erence toprimary questions aboutwhatenergyisfororaboutthesetsof
        social practices on which energy demand depends.     
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      52                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      Overlooking the Dynamics of Demand                     
                                                             
      One ironic consequence is that whilst government documents like
      Pathways to 2050, produced by the UK’s Department of Energy and
      ClimateChange(2010),claimtoexplorefutureenergyneedsandidentify
      ways in which these might be met in a suitably low-carbon manner, they
      failtoengageinanymeaningfulwaywiththebasicdynamicsofdemand.
      Instead, the strategy is to take present practices entirely for granted,
      treating the perpetuation of current ‘standards’ as an unquestioned,
      non-negotiable part of the equation and focusing exclusively on the effi-
      ciency (or otherwise) with which these might be met. In effect, the path-
      ways and scenarios that follow address issues of supply and consider
      systems of provision, but fail to acknowledge or engage with potentially
      importantchangesinthe‘work’thatisdoneinsociety,orinthecomplex
      ofsocialpracticesthatconstitutedailylife.Twosmallexamplesfromthis
      report give a sense of how future needs are conceptualized.
        The Pathways to 2050 report is organized around a series of scenarios
      whichexploretheenergyandcarbonimplicationsofinnovationandchange
      acrossdifferentsectors.Asisusual,thediscussionrevolvesaroundtechnol-
      ogies and resources. For instance, the report sets out a range of possible
      futuresinwhichtheestimatedneedforhotwatervariesfroma50percent
      increasethroughtoa50percentdecrease,comparedwith2007figures.The
      basicunderstandingisthathot-waterusageisessentiallyamatterofafford-
      ability,takenforgrantedneedandtechnicalefficiency/avoidanceofwaste.
      Thereportconsequentlysupposesthateconomicgrowthwouldresultinan
      ‘increaseduseofhotwater,andagreaternumberofhotwaterusingappli-
      ances’(DepartmentofEnergyandClimateChange,2010:99),butmakesno
      referencetowhattheseappliancesmightbefor,ortothesocialpracticesof
      which they might be a part. Meanwhile, assessments of the potential for
      reducing hot-water consumption refer to the scope for eliminating waste
      and promoting efficiency, but not to changes in bathing, laundering or
      washing, on which hot-water demand actually depends. A 50 per cent
      decrease in hot-water consumption is therefore ‘thought to be the limit
      that could be achieved with greater consumer awareness of hot water effi-
      ciency, and more water efficient fittings’ (Department of Energy and
      ClimateChange,2010:102).Thisreductionisthoughttobefeasiblebecause
      itdoesnotsupposeanymodificationin hot-waterusingpracticesorinthe
      demandassociatedwiththem.                              
        A second example, this time to do with consumer electronics, demon-
      strates a similar reluctance to confront the dynamics of demand. Leisure
      andhomeentertainmentareareasinwhichpracticesareco-evolvingfast,
      generating new ways of using electricity and of spending time. Although
      there has been a sixfold increase in consumer electronics since the 1970s
      (Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2010: 49), the Pathways to
      2050 report makes no attempt to consider or evaluate potential trends in

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             53      
                                                             
        the sector as a whole. Instead, the scenarios focus, exclusively, on
        whether consumers will or will not purchase the most efficient electronic
        devices on the market. The low demand scenario consequently supposes
        that when ‘replacing our consumer electronics and home computing
        products, we could adopt only the best practice products until 2050’
        (Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2010: 55). 
         It is difficult, and perhaps impossible, to predict how practices might
        change.Bysettingthisissueasideandbytakingpresentpracticeasabench-
        mark, the report’s authors are, in theory, able to estimate the impact of
        technological innovation and of improvements in efficiency. Although this
        makesitpossibletoproduceandcomparescenarios,thereisnogettingaway
        from the fact that the necessary assumption of stability – at the level of
        practice–isfundamentallyflawed.Thisisnottheonlyroutetotake.Since
        thePathwaysto2050reportisorganizedaroundaseriesofscenarios,thereis
        scope to consider and compare future trajectories in terms of practice. For
        example,ascenariomethodcould be used to imaginesome ofthedifferent
        waysinwhichconsumer-electronic-dependentpracticesmightdevelop.
         We have not singled out the Pathways to 2050 report because it is in
        any way unusual in failing to engage with the underlying dynamics of
        demand. Many other policy documents, including the International
        Energy Agency’s Saving Electricity in a Hurry (Meier, 2005), updated
        in 2011 (Pasquier, 2011), proceed on exactly the same basis, comparing
        and evaluating methods of delivering the same services with fewer
        resources, and doing so without questioning the characteristics of the
        practices on which energy use depends.               
         Although energy is never used outside some specific context or practice,
        thediscursivestrategyoftreatingitasifitwereameaningfultopicinitsown
        rightunderpinsaraftofresearchandanalysis.Acrosstheboard,theproject
        ofpersuadingindividualstomeetcurrentneedswithfewerresourcesconsti-
        tuteswhatseemstobeaself-evidentlysensiblegoalthatcanbesafelypursued
        withoutfearofstirringupahornets’nestofuncomfortablequestionsabout
        thesustainabilityorotherwiseofpresentconstellationsofpractice.
         On the other hand, it is important to recognize that policies that are
        designed to deliver similar services but with less energy are anything but
        ‘neutral’. Like it or not, they play an important part in reproducing the
        status quo and in sustaining and legitimizing contemporary material
        arrangements and practices. For those interested in long-term sustain-
        ability, this is a major drawback.                   
         Whilst there is some scope for technological innovation and increased
        efficiency, it is clear that if climate change policy is to make a difference
        on the scale and at the rate required, it will have to engage more overtly,
        and more explicitly, with the bundles and constellations of practice on
        which energy demand depends. By implication, any policy analysis that
        looks decades ahead needs to consider the dynamics of social practice
        andanticipatechangesinwhatpeopledoandhenceinwhatenergyisfor.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      54                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      More than that, such analyses need to recognize that some such changes
      are already set in train and that future possibilities are to some extent
      prefigured by past and present policy and by the material arrangements
      andinfrastructuresassociatedwiththem.Asmentionedabove,designing
      policies and strategies around the status quo is itself an important inter-
      vention in the future dynamics of demand.              
                                                             
      Reinstating the Dynamics of Demand                     
      Nye’s (2010) book on blackouts provides a compelling picture of the
      extent and rate at which energy has become embedded in (and has trans-
      formed) whatpeople do.Asheexplains, inthe 1950s,apowercut would
      have an impact on office work by affecting lighting and ventilation sys-
      tems. People might have to go home at dusk but typing and filing would
      continue as normal. Today a power cut would bring much of what con-
      stitutes office activity to a sudden halt. This is just one example and Nye
      is of the view that large parts of the USA would quickly become unin-
      habitable if power supplies should fail for any length of time.
        The point is not just that societies are increasingly dependent on reli-
      able supplies of electricity and oil in particular. For those interested in
      developing practice-oriented policy (see Shove, 2012), there are two key
      questions arising from this example: first, how is it that such intercon-
      nected bundles and constellations of practices and material arrange-
      ments, including technologies of energy provision, distribution and
      consumption, have taken hold and, second, how might they change?
      The way to address these questions is not by focusing on how resources
      are managed and distributed or by discussing the politics and technolo-
      giesoffuelandpowerintheabstract.Asarguedhere,thesepatternsand
      arrangements are outcomes of what energy is for.       
        It therefore makes sense to start from this point, from the site of the
      social, and work back to discover the material arrangements amidst
      which contemporary practices occur, and which are partly constituted
      in and through these same practices. This is, in essence, a matter of
      positioning the practices on which energy demand depends as central
      topics of policy intervention and of analysis and debate. Whether they
      areawareofitornot,policymakersofallsorts–notonlythosewhodeal
      with energy – have a hand in prefiguring and sometimes modifying the
      range of practices that are reproduced in any one society, and the energy
      demands that follow. Jasanoff and Kim (2013: 189) underline the polit-
      ical implications of this conclusion, contending that: 
        Newenergyfutureswillneedtoreconfigurethephysical deepstruc-
        tures of civilization – grids and pipelines, seashores and pastoral
        landscapes, and suburbs and cities – that were shaped by the
        energy choices of the past. Equally, we argue here, radical changes
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             55      
                                                             
         in the fuel supply are likely to transform social infrastructures,
         changing established patterns of life and work and allocating bene-
         fits and burdens differently from before. Accordingly analysts
         should pay greater attention to the social dimensions of energy
         transitions, complementing more conventional analyses of eco-
         nomic and engineering issues.                       
                                                             
        Tothisweaddtheveryimportantpointthat‘socialdimensionsofenergy
        transitions’onlyexist,andonlyhavemeaningthroughandaspartofthe
        reproductionofspecificsocialpractices,henceourpersistentemphasison
        the need to consider the changing forms of ‘work’ that material arrange-
        ments, including flows of matter and energy, enable us to do.
         In combination, these observations point to a distinctive agenda for
        future research, some of which will be undertaken by DEMAND, a new
        RCUK-funded centre focusing on the dynamics of energy, mobility and
        demand.1 The centre’s research programme revolves around three key
        propositions.First,thatenergyisusednotforitsownsakebutaspartof
        accomplishing social practices. Energy demand is consequently dynamic,
        social, cultural, political and historical: it is bound up with the temporal
        rhythm of society and with what people do. Second, energy demand is
        profoundly shaped by material arrangements. In a very literal sense,
        demand and the means to consume constitute each other. These means
        encompass grids, power stations, road and rail networks through to the
        multitude of devices with which end-users engage (computers, heating
        systems, cars, etc.). Third, these are all implicated in the ongoing repro-
        duction of practice, and of bundles and constellations of practice that
        define what energy is for. From this it follows that insofar as policy has
        an impact on energy use, it does so in, through, and by means of mod-
        ifying or transforming material arrangements, practices and social
        orders.                                              
         Theselinesofenquiryarerootedinatheoreticalapproachwhichtakes
        social practices,including extensive complexes of socialpractice, ordered
        across space and time, to be the central unit of analysis. As described
        above, much existing research, including other articles in this special
        issue, and many policy studies are grounded in different genres of
        social theory. In many cases, energy supply and demand are conceptua-
        lized as outcomes of what are taken to be somewhat independent social,
        technical, political or economic systems.            
         As one might expect, different paradigms matter for the way in which
        questions are framed, and for how energy demand is understood. They
        also matter for the types of policy intervention proposed in response to
        majorchallenges,includingthoseofradicallyreducingCO emissions.In
                                             2               
        thisarticle wehavesuggested thatintreating energyas atopicin its own
        right, and in disregarding the extent to which energy demand is
        embedded in social practice, conventional approaches have the

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      56                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      unintendedconsequenceofreproducingcontemporaryformsof‘normal’
      practice.Assuch,theyareincapableofengagingwith,letalonedebating
      and promoting, change on the scale required. Likewise, in losing sight of
      basic questions about what energy is for, many social and political the-
      ories take the significance of resource management for granted. As a
      result, the politics and economics of supply are discussed aside from an
      understanding of the underlying dynamics of demand. In conclusion, we
      argue for reinstating fundamental questions about what energy is for in
      researchandinpolicy;wesuggestthatsuchamovedependsonrecogniz-
      ing energy as an ingredient of practice, and we contend that reframing
      the energy ‘problem’ in these terms is as important for social theory as it
      is for climate change and sustainability.              
      Acknowledgement                                        
      This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
      (grantnumberEP/K011723/1)aspartoftheRCUKEnergyProgrammeandbyEDFas
      part ofthe R&D ECLEER Programme.                       
                                                             
      Note                                                   
      1. DEMAND Centre Award No: EP/K011723/1. For more details, see
        www.demand.ac.uk                                     
                                                             
      References                                             
                                                             
      AllwoodJetal.(2013)Materialefficiency: Providingmaterial serviceswithless
        material production. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 371
        (DOI: 10.1098/rsta.2012.0496).                       
      Bartoletto S and Del Mar Rubio Varas M (2008) Energy transition and CO2
        emissions in Southern Europe: Italy and Spain (1861–2000). Global
        Environment 2: 47–81.                                
      Department of Energy and Climate Change (2010) 2050 Pathways Analysis.
        London: HMSO.                                        
      ElzenB,GeelsFWandGreenK(eds)(2004)SystemInnovationandtheTransition
        to Sustainability: Theory, Evidence and Policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
      Fouquet R and Pearson PJG (1998) A thousand years of energy use in the
        United Kingdom. Energy Journal 19(4): 1–41.          
      Geels F (2002) Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration pro-
        cesses: A multi-level perspective and a case-study. Research Policy 31(8–9):
        1257–1274.                                           
      Giddens A (1994) The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Gram-Hanssen K (2010) Standby consumption in households analysed with a
        practice theory approach. Journal of Industrial Ecology 14(1): 150–165.
      Gram-Hanssen K (2011) Understanding change and continuity in residential
        energy consumption. Journal of Consumer Culture 11(1): 61–78.
      Hargreaves T (2011) Practice-ing behaviour change: Applying social practice
        theory to pro-environmental behaviour change. Journal of Consumer
        Culture 11(1): 79–99.                                

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Shove and Walker                             57      
                                                             
        HarveyMandMcMeekinA(2010)PoliticalShapingofTransitionstoBiofuelsin
         Europe,BrazilandtheUSA.CentreforResearchinEconomicSociologyand
         Innovation (CRESI), Working Paper 2010–02. Colchester: University of
         Essex.                                              
        Hughes T (1983) Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–
         1930. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
        Jasanoff S and Kim SH (2013) Sociotechnical imaginaries and national energy
         policies. Science as Culture 22(2): 189–196.        
        LatourB(1992)Wherearethemissingmasses?Thesociologyofafewmundane
         artefacts.In:BijkerWandLawJ(eds)ShapingTechnology/BuildingSociety:
         Studies in Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
        MacKay DJC (2009) Sustainable Energy: Without the Hot Air. Cambridge: Uit
         Cambridge Limited.                                  
        Meier A (2005) Saving Electricity in a Hurry. Paris: OECD/IEA.
        Moellers N and Zachmann K (2012) Past and Present Energy Societies: How
         Energy Connects Politics, Technologies and Cultures. New Brunswick, NJ:
         Transaction Publishers.                             
        Nye DE (1999) Consuming Power: A Social History of American Energies.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
        Nye DE (2010) When the Lights Went Out: A History of Blackouts in America.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
        Parkhill K, et al. (2013) Transforming the UK Energy System: Public Values,
         Attitudes and Acceptability: Synthesis Report. London: UKERC.
        Pasquier S (2011) Saving Electricity in a Hurry II. Paris: OECD/IEA.
        Rosa EA, Machlis GE and Keating KM (1988) Energy and society. Annual
         Review of Sociology 14: 149–172.                    
        Schatzki TR (1996) Social Practices: A Wittgensteinian Approach to Human
         Activity and the Social. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        Schatzki TR (2002) The Site of the Social: A Philosophical Account of the
         Constitution of Social Life and Change. University Park: Pennsylvania State
         University Press.                                   
        Schatzki TR (2006) On organizations as they happen. Organization Studies
         27(12): 1863–1873.                                  
        Schatzki TR (2009) Timespace and the organization of social life. In: Shove E,
         et al. (eds) Time, Consumption and Everyday Life. Oxford: Berg.
        Schatzki TR (2010) Materiality and social life. Nature and Culture 5(2):
         123–149.                                            
        Schatzki TR (2011) Where the Action Is: On Large Social Phenomena such as
         Sociotechnical Regimes. Sustainable Practices Research Group Working
         Paper 1. Manchester: University of Manchester.      
        Schatzki TR, Knorr-Cetina K and Savigny E (eds) (2001) The Practice Turn in
         Contemporary Theory. London: Routledge.             
        Shove E (2012) Putting practice into policy: Reconfiguring questions of con-
         sumption and climate change. Contemporary Social Science: 1–15
         (DOI: 10.1080/21582041.2012.692484).                
        Shove E, Pantzar M and Watson M (2012) The Dynamics of Social Practice:
         Everyday Life and How It Changes. London: Sage.     
        Sørensen B (2012) A History of Energy: Northern Europe from the Stone Age to
         the Present Day. Abingdon: Earthscan.               

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      58                            Theory, Culture & Society 31(5)
                                                             
      Urry J (2010) Consuming the planet to excess. Theory, Culture & Society
        27(2–3): 191–212.                                    
      Urry J (2013) Societies beyond Oil: Oil Dregs and Social Futures. London: Zed
        Books.                                               
      Verbong G and Loorbach D (2012) Governing the Energy Transition: Reality,
        Illusion or Necessity? London: Taylor & Francis.     
      Verbong GPJ and Geels FW (2010) Exploring sustainability transitions in the
        electricitysectorwithsocio-technicalpathways.TechnologicalForecastingand
        Social Change 77(8): 1214–1221.                      
      Warde A (2005) Consumption and theories of practice. Journal of Consumer
        Culture 5(2): 131–153.                               
      White LA (1943) Energy and the evolution of culture. American Anthropologist
        45(3): 335–356.                                      
      Elizabeth Shove is Co-Director of the DEMAND research centre
      (Dynamics of Energy, Mobility and Demand) and Professor of
      Sociology at Lancaster University.                     
                                                             
      Gordon Walker is Co-Director of DEMAND and Professor of
      Environment, Risk and Justice at Lancaster Environment Centre.
                                                             
      This article is part of the Special Issue on Energy & Society, edited by
      David Tyfield and John Urry.                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             