[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Special Issue: Post-Neoliberalism?                   
                                            Theory,Culture&Society
                                             2021,Vol.38(6)143–166
        Software,   Sovereignty                              
                                              !TheAuthor(s)2021
        and  the Post-Neoliberal                             
                                             Articlereuseguidelines:
        Politics of Exit                 sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/0263276421999439
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Harrison Smith                                       
        Universityof Sheffield                               
        Roger Burrows                                        
        Newcastle University                                 
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        This paper examines the impact of neoreactionary (NRx) thinking – that of Curtis
        Yarvin, Nick Land, Peter Thiel and Patri Friedman in particular – on contemporary
        politicaldebatesmanifestin‘architecturesofexit’.WespecificallyfocusonUrbit,as
        an NRx digital architecture that captures how post-neoliberal politics imagines
        notions of freedom and sovereignty through a micro-fracturing of nation-states
        into ‘gov-corps’. We trace the development of NRx philosophy – and situate this
        withincontemporarypoliticalandtechnologicalchangetotheorizethesignificanceof
        exit manifest within the notion of ‘dynamic geographies’. While technological pro-
        grammessuchasUrbitmayneverultimatelysucceed,wearguethatthese,andother
        speculative investments such as ‘seasteading’, reflect broader post-neoliberal NRx
        imaginariesthatwere,perhaps,prefiguredaquarterofacenturyagoinTheSovereign
        Individual.                                          
        Keywords                                             
        Dark Enlightenment, neoreaction (NRx), post-neoliberalism, seasteading, sovereign
        individual, Urbit                                    
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
        Itwouldnowbeimpossibletocountenanceanydiscussionoftheconcept
        of post-neoliberalism without considering the mediating influence of the
        depressingme´langeofdiscoursesthat–especiallypost-2008–havecome
        to besummarized under themoniker ofthe alt-right.As Gilroy (2019:3)
        explains, this term is clearly not just adescriptive one; rather, it has been
        chosen strategically in order to ‘accomplish new political goals’. It refers
        to an ‘informal coalition that is well-funded and enjoys access to the
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:RogerBurrows.Email:roger.burrows@ncl.ac.uk
        TCSOnlineForum:https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/ 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      144                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      highest levels of power’. It is also ‘technologically sophisticated and has
      assembled an elusive command of political and psychological communi-
      cationviathelibidinalandaffectiveaspectsofnewtechnologyingeneral,
      andsocialmediainparticular’.AsAmbedkar(2017)hasshown,itisalsoa
      coalitionthat,althoughitsharessomecommonalities–apredilectionfor
      authoritarianism over democracy, commitments to various forms of lib-
      ertarianism, antipathy towards the supposed cultural hegemony of ‘pro-
      gressive’discourses,andaninclinationtowardsracismandmisogyny–is
      otherwise riven by highly divergent perspectives concerning economics,
      nationalism, cultural values and more besides. In this paper we want to
      offer a critical exploration of the activities of one particular fragment
      within this coalition – bloggers, computer programmers, entrepreneurs
      and others who coalesce around neoreactionary (or NRx) philosophies
      – which, in recent years, has been getting ever closer to a (rightward
      shifting) political mainstream (Gilroy, 2019; Duesterberg, 2017;
      Hermansson et al., 2020; Mulhall, 2020; O’Brien, 2020; Topinka, 2019).
        We are interested in connecting particular theoretical positions with
      material investments and flows of capital that are fundamental to NRx
      future imaginaries, specifically those that purport to offer a ‘return to
      first principles’. In order to do this, we focus, in particular, on the devel-
      opmentofanewdigitalplatform–Urbit–fundedandlargelywrittenby
      NRx ‘luminaries’. Briefly, Urbit proposes to reinvent the internet
      through a clean-slate data architecture complete with its own operating
      system, kernel, network protocols, programming language, and digital
      identity.Withinthecontextofbroaderdiscussionsaboutpost-neoliberal-
      ism, we see a critical discussion of Urbit as contributing to several over-
      lapping debates concerning the future cultural politics of software and
      cloud-computing for: epistemological transformations invoked by artifi-
      cial intelligence (Parisi, 2019; Amoore, 2019); the use of decentralized
      technologies, such as blockchain, for governance and self-determination
      (Atzori, 2017; Campbell-Verduyn, 2018); and, crucially, sovereignty
      (Bratton, 2016; Amoore, 2020). Hitherto, these literatures have had
      little engagement with the radical politics of what we will term redecen-
      tralization,ortheunderlyingpost-neoliberal–andprimarilylibertarian–
      theories of exit that have become inscribed into a wider ideology of data
      power thought capable of enacting new forms of jurisdictional sover-
      eignty. This paper offers a critical examination of this lacuna.
      A Strange Brew: Based Deleuzians, Techno-Fogies and    
      Billionaire Libertarians                               
      ApproachingNRxthinkingjustafewyearsagomighthavebeenamildly
      divertingexercise;achanceto‘connectsomephilosophicalideas...using
      some very silly right-wing nutjobs who were nevertheless...interesting’
      (Sandifer, 2017: 1). As MacDougald (2015) describes, NRx writing often
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            145     
                                                             
        appears as ‘little more than a fever swamp of feudal misogynists, racist
        programmers and ‘‘fascist teenage dungeon masters,’’ gathering on sub-
        redditstoawaitthecollapseofWesterncivilization’.Assuch,itreadslike
        ‘alltheawfulthingsyoualwayssuspectedaboutlibertarianismwithodds
        and ends from PUA culture, Victorian Social Darwinism, and an only
        semi-ironic attachment to absolutism’. However, post-2016, as Sandifer
        (2017:1)expressesitinherowninimitablestyle,‘everythingwenttoshit’
        and suddenly these otherwise ‘batshit crazy’ ideas, associated software
        projects and social prototyping experiments began to manifest across a
        whole range of global cultural, political and technological imaginaries.
        As hard as it is to fathom, NRx thinking now forms a significant part of
        the theoretical universe that contemporary political figures and ‘proto-
        theorists’ such as Dominic Cummings (in the UK) (Cummings, 2020;
        Lewis et al., 2002; Mulhall, 2020; Volpicelli, 2020; Wolf, 2020) and
        Steve Bannon (in the US) (Goldhill, 2017; Gray, 2017) draw upon and
        are attempting to promulgate into mainstream political discourse. As
        Nagle (2017: 53) explains it, supporters of NRx ideas seem to have
        been more adept at ‘heeding the ideas...of...Gramsci’s theory of
        hegemony’, especially via social media (Daniels, 2018), than have those
        on the left more usually associated with them (Mouffe, 2019).
         It is difficult to know how best to approach this material analytically.
        AsGilroy(2019:3)suggests,whendiscussingfascistideas‘thereisalways
        adangerthatcritics enduptakingthem moreseriouslythantheiradher-
        ents do’. It is also the case that much of the material with which we need
        to engage is located online and often in a form outwith the usual proto-
        colsandstylisticsoftheacademy.TheNRxpoliticalprojectisessentially
        ‘anti-egalitarian’, ‘anti-progressive’, and argues that ‘democracy is bust;
        rule by the people doesn’t work, and doesn’t lead to good governance’
        (Gray, 2017). The aim of NRx seems to be to dissolve existing nation-
        statesinto‘competingauthoritarianseasteadsonthemodelofSingapore’
        (MacDougald, 2015). It is a philosophy that argues that ‘society should
        break into tiny states, each effectively governed by a CEO’ (Goldhill,
        2017). At its heart is the proposal that we should reorganize ourselves
        into a patchwork of privately-owned states (‘Gov-Corps’) and use vari-
        ous mechanisms of ‘exit’ to develop a dynamic market for governance;
        people are called upon ‘to ‘‘vote with their feet’’ by opting-in to the
        jurisdiction that best fits their needs and beliefs’ (Lynch, 2017: 82).1 As
        we will discuss, for the advocates of NRx, such an imagined future does
        not just require the development of a radical new ideology; it also
        requires the early construction of new socio-technical architectures
        within which this ideology can be instantiated.      
         There are numerous individuals associated with NRx ideas, but four
        are perhaps key: two – Curtis Yarvin and Nick Land – might be con-
        sideredtheoriginal‘builders’(aswewillsee,thisisnotaninnocentterm)
        of the position; and two – Peter Thiel and Patri Friedman – are major

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      146                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Silicon Valley ideological and financial supporters who have, on occa-
      sion, contributed additional theoretical and practical ballast to the pro-
      ject (Gilroy, 2019; Goldhill, 2017; Haider, 2017; MacDougald, 2015,
      2016).                                                 
        Curtis Yarvin is a Silicon Valley computer scientist who until recently
      ran a business start-up indirectly funded by Thiel, responsible for Urbit,
      who produced a series of long blog posts between 2007 and 2014 (with a
      brief coda in 2016) entitled Unqualified Reservations (UR),2 writing in
      the persona of Mencius Moldbug.3 Central to these writings is a thor-
      oughgoing critique of ‘progressivism’ in all its forms which:
        hasbecomeaveritablereligionofquackgovernment.Itspoliciesare
        always counterintuitive: it preaches leniency as the cure for crime,
        timidity as military genius, profligacy as the acme of economics,
        ‘specialeducation’astheheartofpedagogy,indulgenceasoversight,
        appeasementasdiplomacy.Asitgoesfromonedisastertothenext,
        progressivismneverconsidersthepossibilitythattheobvious,rather
        than its opposite, could be the case. (Moldbug, 2009)
                                                             
        Nick Land will be more familiar to readers of this journal.4 He was
      once the enfant terrible of what came to be called ‘Deleuzian
      Thatcherism’ (Galloway and Noys, 2014)5 at the University of
      Warwick in the UK in the 1990s (Blincoe, 2017; Reynolds, 2009), but
      since the early 2000s he has been based in Shanghai, rearticulating the
      outpourings of Moldbug and others, in the Deleuzian-inflected language
      of right-accelerationism (Beckett, 2017; Burrows, 2019; Land, 2017;
      MacDougald, 2015, 2016) in a long series of blog posts and tweets and
      one longer-form piece (almost 30,000 words), entitled The Dark
      Enlightenment (Land, 2012). He has also become a central figure in alt-
      right meme culture (Topinka, 2019). His position might now more easily
      be characterized as a bizarre form of ‘Based Deleuzianism’ (Murphy,
      2019). Gilroy (2019: 4) brilliantly characterizes the relationship between
      this odd couple (Yarvin and Land):                     
        This...[alt-right]substratedrawsuponthedubiouslegaciesofthin-
        kers like Georges Bataille and Carl Schmitt as well as a techno-
        orientalist sublime discovered in the exciting possibility that states
        will be shrunk down to minimal proportions and run as corpor-
        ations. ...This...dream is larded with a gleeful anti-humanism
        and a fervent racism now routinely and blandly re-described as
        ‘human biodiversity’ and ‘ethno-nationalism.’ The would-be Magi
        of the movement are led online by the failed academic philosopher
        Nick Land and others who have, in turn, been influenced by
        ‘Mencius Moldbug,’ a prominent techno-fogey who draws
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            147     
                                                             
         inspiration from some of the more obscure works penned by
         Victorian...theorists of imperial domination.       
                                                             
         Peter Thiel, likely the most infamous of the quartet, is a libertarian
        billionaire Silicon Valley investor – founder of both PayPal and Palantir
        and a major investor in Facebook – and occasional author, who indir-
        ectly bankrolls the ideological and techno-business activities of Yarvin,
        Friedmanandmanyothers.Itisnotdifficulttounderstandwhythework
        of Yarvin, in particular, appeals to Thiel. As we will go on to discuss, in
        many ways NRx reads as a radical updating of the ideas and sentiments
        contained in a book that Thiel claims has most influenced him – The
        SovereignIndividual byDavidson andRees-Mogg(1997).6Thiel’sinvest-
        mentphilosophyemphasizesthepursuitofinnovationby‘thinkingabout
        business from first principles instead of formulas’ (Thiel, 2014: 3) and
        formsacorepillartounderstandinghisinterestinprojectssuchasUrbit.
        Patri Friedman is part of the neoliberal Friedman dynasty – David was
        hisfather,andMiltonandRosehisgrandparents(Ruger,2011)–andhe
        hasbeenasoftwareengineerat Google,anauthorandtheco-founderof
        The Seasteading Institute,7 a start-up, again originally funded by Thiel,
        where many NRx ideas are supposedly prototyped (Quirk with
        Friedman, 2017).                                     
         Between them, these four characters – along with others – have pro-
        duced what amounts to a form of ‘alt-social theory’ or, in their terms,
        social theory in the service of ‘red pilling’ (Sandifer, 2017: 36–41;
        Wendling, 2018: 29–30); a notion widely used within alt-right discourses,
        deriving, of course, from the 1999 film The Matrix,8 in which the central
        characterNeoisofferedthechoicebetweena‘bluepill’–easytoswallow
        and providing continuity and blissful ignorance – or a ‘red pill’ which,
        although hard to get down, leads to liberation and some new clear-eyed
        ‘truth’. It will come as no surprise that, from a NRx perspective, the
        primary function of the traditional academy – those working in the
        arts, the humanities and the social sciences in particular – is to produce
        ‘bluepills’.InNRxargot,mostacademicsare‘culturalMarxists’,aloose
        term which refers to virtually anything on the left of the political spec-
        trumthatconstitutes‘anall-encompassingconspiracybeingdrivenbyan
        uncertain...number or combination of groups or sub-groups that come
        under the vast umbrella of the Cathedral’ (Wendling, 2018: 81). This
        means that the domain assumptions that mainstream academics make
        about the social world, as well as their routine practices, are conceptua-
        lizedinNRxdiscoursesaskeyfettersto‘redpill’thinking.TheCathedral
        – with a genealogy, ironically, leading back to the Puritan church –
        encompasses not just the universities, but also the civil service, the
        media and any other organizations that foreground what Yarvin calls
        Universalism – egalitarianism, democracy, constructivism and so on –
        that forms, for Yarvin, the ‘faith of our ruling caste, the Brahmins’

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      148                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      (Moldbug, 2007a). It is a conceptualization that reads like a crazily
      inverted version of the old Althusserian notion of the ‘ideological state
      apparatus’ (ISAs) (Althusser, 1971); but rather than dampening down
      proletarian revolutionary dissent, in the NRx version the ideological
      function seems to do quite the opposite – to inculcate a false belief in
      the efficacy of democratic systems of government and the associated
      stymying of new forms of uncompensated capitalism. Not surprisingly,
      NRx discourse frequently works through such ironic inversions to nat-
      uralize social hierarchies and inequalities. Public figures such as Elon
      Musk and Ivanka Trump have both claimed to be ‘red-pilled’ (Rao,
      2020).                                                 
        Yarvin takes ‘red-pilling’ one step further, hoping his works will serve
      to ‘cure your brain’ of the Orwellian mind-control state induced by
      Anglo-American progressive democracy.9 Yarvin is probably the most
      importantfigureinNRx,asitwouldbefairtoregardhisURblogasthe
      foundational text of the movement. Writing as Mencius Moldbug,
      Yarvin offered up idiosyncratic, ironic and voluminous prose that mean-
      ders through the work of Thomas Carlyle, Ludwig von Mises and vari-
      ous strains of individualist libertarianism and which, in the end,
      concludes that Prussian cameralism, in which a state is a business that
      owns a country, offers the most viable model for a future 21st-century
      politics. Originally called ‘neocameralism’, his position soon became
      known as ‘neoreactionary’ philosophy (NRx) and then, once passed
      through Land’s nihilist Deleuzian filter, as The Dark Enlightenment.
      According to Tait (2019: 189), Yarvin’s vision is deeply grounded in
      his mathematical precociousness and his long-term immersion in
      Silicon Valley techno-libertarian culture. Indeed, Sandifer (2017: 129)
      considers that because he is ‘an accomplished software engineer’, he
      has ‘visibly concluded that because software engineering is hard and
      history/philosophyareeasyifhecandotheformerwellhecanobviously
      do the latter well, and indeed better’. He seems to accept this reading of
      himself as someone committed to what is essentially a computationalist
      ontology – describing himself in a recent interview as a ‘computer pro-
      grammer’ who enjoys applying the logics of first principles to historical
      systems, always asking ‘what would this look like if you could build it
      from scratch?’10                                       
        Inthisspirit,hebeganURwithhisFormalistManifesto,whichstarts:
      ‘The other day I was tinkering around in my garage and I decided to
      build a new ideology’ (Moldbug, 2007b). Formalism is a ‘do-it-yourself’
      ideological project – an engineering challenge, even – to remove one’s
      existingideologyand‘install’anewonethatrejectsprogressivedoctrines
      transmitted by the Cathedral. Moldbug’s techno-fogeyism is generative
      of a computational worldview that is ‘rational, rule-bound, and solv-
      able...[and where]...software and hardware are the dominant meta-
      phors for society’ (Tait, 2019: 189). In their writings both Yarvin and

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            149     
                                                             
        Land point towards a key essay by Thiel (2009) published in Cato
        Unbound – the house journal of the Cato Institute in Washington, DC,
        foundedbylibertarianbillionaireCharlesKoch–inwhichheinfamously
        declares that: ‘I no longer believe that freedom and democracy are com-
        patible’. Land (2012) of course goes further, suggesting that ‘democracy
        is not merely doomed, it is doom itself’. For him, democratic political
        forms involve:                                       
         cropping out all high-frequency feedback mechanisms (such as
         market signals), and replacing them with sluggish, infra-red loops
         that pass through a centralized forum of ‘general will’, a radically
                                                             
         democratized society insulates parasitism from what it does, trans-
         forming local, painfully dysfunctional, intolerable, and thus
         urgently corrected behavior patterns into global, numbed, and
         chronic socio-political pathologies. (Land, 2012)   
         The NRx alternative is to, first, ‘Retire All Government Employees’
        (RAGE) in order to ‘reboot’ the economy,11 and, second, replace demo-
        cratic institutions with a CEO (or even a Monarch). The resulting ‘gov-
        corp’ – a society run as a business – can then be regulated not via the
        ‘voice’ of its citizenry – there will be no democracy – but via their ability
        to ‘exit’ as consumers in a free market for governance. Land has become
        obsessed with the ideas contained in the classic treatise of Albert
        Hirschman (1970) on the distinction between Exit, Voice, and
        Loyalty.12 For Land, democratic voice and the ‘warm’ solidarities of
        loyalty must be opposed, as they will, as we saw above, cut ‘out all
        high-frequency feedback mechanisms’. For Yarvin (2019a), any attempt
        to engage politically through voice would be ineffective – even futile –
        because of ‘the pervasive error’ that monopolizes civic and political dis-
        course. Designing new architectures of exit becomes of paramount
        importance; indeed, for Land (2012), quoting Patri Friedman, ‘free exit
        is so important that...it [is] the only Universal Human Right’. Exit
        informs Yarvin’s theory of Patchwork (Moldbug, 2008) – again drawing
        on computer engineering as a proxy for social ontology – which would
        constitute a ‘new operating system for the world’:   
         The basic idea...is that, as the crappy governments we inherited
         from history are smashed, they should be replaced by a global
         spiderweb of tens, even hundreds, of thousands of sovereign and
         independent mini-countries, each governed by its own joint-stock
         corporation without regard to the residents’ opinions. If residents
         don’t like their government, they can and should move. The design
         is all ‘exit,’ no ‘voice.’                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      150                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        While Yarvin thinks this operating system would borrow political
      designs ‘across time and space...it is only natural that a reactionary
      design for future government will have a somewhat feudal feel’ while
      also being something ‘new’ that would ‘not feel like the past. It will
      feel like the future’ (Moldbug, 2008). Patchwork’s feudal futurism will
      be held together by a complex of cryptographic hierarchies of sovereign
      corporate power and reinforced with durable surveillance infrastructures
      in order to maintain order, security and profit. How it is imagined this
      might be built is discussed in what follows.           
                                                             
      Urbit, Hyperstition and Redecentralization             
                                                             
      As we have already noted, Friedman is another NRx entrepreneur-cum-
      philosopher backed by Thiel’s dollars, and the co-founder of The
      Seasteading Institute, an organization supposedly busy designing per-
      manent (almost Lovecraftian) cities at sea – seasteads – prefigurative
      gov-corps outside the territory claimed by democratic governments.
      They are just one example of an NRx envisioning of the emergence of
      a complex patchwork of small, and competing, gov-corps – autonomous
      gated communities, city-states, even ‘off-world’ communities (think Elon
      Musk). Friedman offers up the imagined possibility of a ‘dynamic geog-
      raphy’–amaterialarchitectureofexit–informedbytheneoliberalideas
      of his father and his grandfather.                     
        David Friedman described a machinery of freedom. Milton
        Friedman advocated the freedom to choose. Patri identified a
        machinery of freedom to choose...he proposed an idea that
        became contagious: imagine ten thousand homesteads on the sea
        – ‘seasteads’ – where ocean pioneers will be free to experiment with
        new societies. Aquatic citizens could live in modular pods that can
        detach at any time and sail to join another floating city, compelling
        ocean governments to compete for mobile citizens. A market of
        competing governments...would allow the best ideas for govern-
        ancetoemergepeacefully,unleashingunimaginableprogress....By
        such means, an economic and moral argument could become a
        technological experiment. (Quirk with Friedman, 2017: 8–9)
                                                             
        Not surprisingly, this imagined future has turned out to be almost
      entirely impracticable. A recent documentary – The Seasteaders
      (2018)13 – about the ‘progress’ made so far, demonstrates that things
      remain much as they were when Steinberg et al. (2012) explored the
      phenomenon over a decade ago. He and his colleagues reported that at
      a conference hosted by Thiel in 2009:                  
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            151     
                                                             
         The tenor ... ranged from that of a science fiction convention
         (potential seasteaders in attendance, who were overwhelmingly
         men, wondered what they could do to attract women to live on
         seasteads), to a seminar in libertarian economics (references to
         Milton Friedman, Friedrich Hayek, Mancur Olson, and Ayn
         Rand abounded), to a scientific meeting on ocean engineering
         (architecturalrenderingsweredisplayedandcritiqued),toapsyche-
         delic conclave of free-thinking anarchists. ... Indeed, the entire
         seasteading venture might easily be written off as an impractical
         fantasy of social misfits and political dreamers who would like to
         make their own states. (Steinberg et al., 2012: 1533)
                                                             
         What has changed, however, is that those dreaming of creating their
        own states are now greater in number and have more political and insti-
        tutional support for the aspiration. Enclave libertarian ideas – including
        theworkoftheStartupCitiesInstitute(2014)–arenowsupportedbythe
        likes of the Cato Institute, the Mises Institute, the Foundation for
        Economic Education and the Mont Pelerin Society (Lynch, 2017), as
        well as Silicon Valley (and other) billionaires and political strategists
        who have been ‘red-pilled’ (Majer, 2016). However, and this is our cen-
        tral point, NRx is all about dreaming of a certain kind. This process is
        central to the NRx hegemonic strategy. Steinberg et al. (2012: 1533–4)
        intuited that seasteads would not be established anytime in the near
        future. Their purpose was to reflect on ostensible limits of freedom
        imposed by the state, so that others ‘will dream up and implement
        more practical alternatives’. This is a cultural and political strategy of
        what hascome to beknownashyperstition – anotion thathaslongbeen
        central to Land’s thinking. For Land, time, like much else, is non-linear
        andthusrelationsbetweencauseandeffectarealwayscomplex.Futurity
        is in the here and now in the sense that it is not something that just
        unfolds; it is something we create. On occasion portended social imagin-
        aries – designs, diagrams, fictions, maps, movies, plans, philosophies,
        prototypes, theories, dreams and more – become generative of the
        future; it is as if the tentacles of future entities reach back through
        time in order to bring into being the very elements necessary for their
        own materialization. As Haider (2017) explains, there does not exist a
        simple ‘word for this cause-and-effect relationship in ordinary English,
        but Land coined one: hyperstition, that which is ‘‘equipoised between
        fiction and technology.’’’ For Land (Carstens, 2009):
         Hyperstition is a positive feedback circuit including culture as a
         component. It can be defined as the experimental (techno-) science
         of self-fulfilling prophecies. Superstitions are merely false beliefs,
         but hyperstitions – by their very existence as ideas – function
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      152                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        causally to bring about their own reality. Capitalist economics is
        extremely sensitive to hyperstition, where confidence acts as an
        effective tonic, and inversely. The (fictional) idea of Cyberspace
        contributed to the influx of investment that rapidly converted it
        into a technosocial reality.14                       
                                                             
        The fictional social imaginaries offered up by movies such as
      Metropolis or Blade Runner and by novels such as Ayn Rand’s Atlas
      Shrugged, William Gibson’s Neuromancer (where the notion of cyber-
      space originates of course; Featherstone and Burrows, 1995) or, espe-
      cially in the case of NRx, Neil Stephenson’s Snow Crash (Stephenson,
      1992), are all examples of hyperstition; but so too are broader discursive
      assemblages that come to function as ideologies. As we have discussed
      above, Friedman’s seasteading adventures could also be thought of in
      this way, and The Dark Enlightenment is perhaps Land’s own hyper-
      reflexive attempt15at constructing ahyperstitional object –fictional enti-
      ties that will themselves into existence. However, we need to return to
      Yarvin if we really want to come to terms with what might be at stake
      here. Although, as we have noted, his UR blog is clearly foundational to
      NRx thinking, it is his work on Urbit that perhaps possesses greater
      hyperstitious qualities. At the same time as he was writing his blog, he
      wasalsowritingcode.YarvinhasbeenworkingonUrbitsince2002,and
      in2013,ashewasrunningdownhisblog,helaunchedtheSanFrancisco-
      based company Tlo¨n Corp, which oversees Urbit with funding from
      Thiel’s venture capital arm, the Founders Fund (Lecher, 2017). Yarvin
      partedcompanywithTlo¨ninJanuary2019,markingtheoccasionwitha
      highly discursive post (Yarvin, 2019b). However, he retains some
      involvement – intellectual and financial – in the development of Urbit
      (Tseng, 2019).                                         
        It could be that the development of NRx ideas and Yarvin’s ability to
      write code are totally separate practices, but this seems unlikely (Lecher,
      2017; Tseng, 2019). As Haider (2017) argues, there is already good evi-
      dence to suggest that NRx ideas are being instantiated within other
      pieces of software, and in this regard, it is not clear why Urbit should
      beanydifferent.Anyway,Yarvinhas‘occasionallyhintedattiesbetween
      his ideology and professional pursuit’ (Lecher, 2017), even producing a
      very brief 2010 Moldbug post called ‘Urbit: functional programming
      from scratch’, pointing towards another post written by his ‘good
      friend, C. GuyYarvin’. But there are also other, stronger, hintsconcern-
      ingthehyperstitiousaspirationofthesoftware,asTseng(2019)observes:
        ‘Tlo¨n, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius,’ the Borges story where Yarvin’s com-
        pany gets its name, describes a secret society, Orbis Tertius, that
        architects an entirely new world, Tlo¨ n, by publishing an encyclo-
        paedia describing it. Over time, bits of this fictional world begin to
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            153     
                                                             
         emergeintherealworld,consumingit,suchthat‘[t]heworldwillbe
         Tlo¨ n.’                                            
                                                             
         Urbit is a ‘secure peer-to-peer network of personal servers, built on a
        clean-slate system software stack’ that ‘replaces multiple developer-
        hosted web services on multiple foreign servers, with multiple self-
        hosted applications on one personal server’ (Yarvin et al., 2016: 3).
        The goal, it seems, is to ‘redecentralize’ the web for the 21st century
        because ‘the internet has lost its way’, and it needs to be built ‘right
        this time’ (Fosdem, 2018). Already we see allusions between Urbit and
        Formalism’s DIY ideological ‘re-installation’ via first principles, re-ima-
        gining new architectural relations between service providers, users, and
        data bypositioning Urbit as a clean-slate operating system and network.
        Urbit’s CEO, Galen Wolfe-Pauly, whose background is in architecture,
        describes it as a ‘global computing platform’ complete with protocols,
        programminglanguages,databases,operatingsystem,andadigitaliden-
        tity. Urbit reconfigures the user/cloud experience by inverting the net-
        work; instead of running applications on developer machines, users will
        run them on their own virtual computer, allowing Urbit users to ‘own
        andcontrol’their‘owndata,codeandidentity’(Urbit,2016).Thismeans
        that ‘[i]n an Urbit world, your data is no longer trapped in a jumble of
        proprietary servers. Your Urbit is a permanent, versioned, typed archive
        the size of your digital life’ (Wolfe-Pauley, 2016). This is, in effect, the
        ‘Western answer to WeChat’ – a seamless extensible social network ‘but
        without the surveillance’ (Urbit, n.d.).             
         Reactions to Urbit have been, at best, mixed. Tseng (2019) considers
        the software to be hopelessly contaminated by NRx ideology. Others,
        from the coding community, who are perhaps more sympathetic to NRx
        (Bianco,2013),althoughinitiallycriticalandbewildered,have,overtime,
        claimed to beable to see someworth in the project. Sandifer(2017:130),
        although willing to accept that Urbit might be ‘an ambitious reinvention
        of the internet according to first principles’, concludes that in the end:
         it’s nearly useless. The problems it solves are so bound up in its
         principles of what security and freedom mean in the context of
         software design that only a handful of people in the world care
         about...And perhaps more importantly, it’s arguably even more
         batshit crazy than [UR]...Yarvin is not the sort of software engin-
         eerwhospendsalotoftimethinkingabouttheuser,whichistosay,
         not the sort of software engineer with much empathy.
         At the time she was writing a few years ago, Sandifer may well have
        been correct in her assertion that only a handful of people cared about
        the issues that Urbit claimed to be foregrounding. Today, however, the
        social implications of incumbent ad-tech driven platforms and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      154                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      monolithicserviceproviderslikeGoogleandFacebook(‘MEGACORP’,
      to borrow from Urbit) are now mainstream concerns. For that matter,
      we surmise that indeed Yarvin does think about users, but via the NRx
      filterofreclaiming specificnotions,derivedfromcomputationalist ontol-
      ogies, of data sovereignty as individual liberty. The importance of
      owning and managing one’s own personal server and the need to re-
      invent networked protocols to correspond with emerging socio-technical
      needs are now also apparent elsewhere. Platforms such as Blockstack,
      Sandstorm, and Solid, a de-centralized platform under development by
      SirTimBerners-Lee’scompanyInrupt,allrepresentdifferentapproaches
      to the reinvention of various systems of redecentralization to correspond
      withemergentdatacontrolprerogativesfor,whatsomespeculate,willbe
      the next generation of web applications and services (Corbyn, 2018).
      While Urbit could be dismissed as just one amongst a number of
      recent re-imaginings of decentralized internet architectures, Yarvin argu-
      ably infuses NRx thinking into the very protocols and data architectures
      of Urbit by completely rebuilding its computational kernel while advo-
      cating for a new constitution for internet governance rooted in NRx
      philosophies. Urbit’s developers argue that existing protocols such as
      TCP/IP and HTTP are based on ‘ancient’ UNIX language that was
      never designed for the kinds of decentralized networking emerging
      through blockchain and related technologies (Dodd, 2018). The mutual
      beliefthattheinternethas‘lostitsway’viahyper-commercialization,and
      that it is not sustainable for future web applications and economies, is
      precisely the nexus that binds together its ideological and computational
      kernels into a hyperstitious analytic.                 
        Aswehavealreadynoted,theUrbitprojectbeganin2002,itsfirstlive
      tests were conducted in 2013, and the first public sale of Urbit address
      space was held in 2016. The technical development of Urbit’s kernel is
      measuredon‘Kelvinversioning’:descendinginreleasestowardsabsolute
      zerowhenthetechnicalprotocolshavecongealedacrossthenetworkand
      never need to be updated. As of 2019, Urbit was composed of three
      layers: Arvo, the operating system and kernel; Azimuth, the identity
      layer; and Aegean, an abstract ‘pattern of independent, decentralized
      societies on top of the Arvo network’ (Urbit, n.d.). Urbit runs on just
      50,000linesofcode.Therearenopatentsorintellectualpropertybecause
      Urbit sees itself as the next open-source superstructure for the internet.
        The Urbit project imagines itself as leading a movement towards
      ‘calm’ and ‘clean’ computing that provides a frictionless, clean-slate,
      user experience, in part because of how Urbit consolidates digital iden-
      tity,property,andauthorityintoAzimuth.Theaddresssystemresembles
      a cosmological ordering of Urbit identities, known as ships, an Azimuth
      ‘point’onEthereum.ShipsusephoneticIPaddresses–a‘pronounceable’
      phone number – such as ‘(cid:2)firbyr-napbes’, that denotes both the bit
      length (in this case 32-bits) and their relationship to the Urbit network.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            155     
                                                             
        A 32-bit planet is a member of a 16-bit star, which belongs to an 8-bit
        galaxy, the most valuable of Urbit assets.16 There are roughly 4 billion
        planets, 65,280 stars, and only 256 galaxies possible on Urbit. Because
        ships are finite assets, Urbit argues they will gradually accrue reputation
        and value as cryptographic property. Ships therefore operate as the
        necessary cryptographic identity by which sovereignty is coded into
        Urbit space – a multipass serving as both an identity and as a wallet,
        ‘both a driver’s license and a credit card. Identity and money. Think
        about it as a ‘‘civilizational key’’ for the new society’ (Wolfe-Pauley,
        2019).                                               
         The finite hierarchical design of Urbit ships aligns with Yarvin’s
        notion of Patchwork sovereignty, whereby the nature of authority is
        proportional to the kinds of digital property owned: ‘If Bitcoin is
        money, and Ethereum is law, Urbit is land’ (Klein, 2019). Urbit’s
        CEO, Galen Wolfe-Pauley, frequently compares Urbit to a city because
        they are both seen as decentralized ‘platforms’ by which a complex of
        social processes (or ‘systems’) take place within a physical infrastructure
        subject to specific rules and logics of a system.17 This comparison
        assumes a deeper set of political beliefs concerning the nature of space
        asfundamentallyinstrumentalinnature:ahouseis‘atoolforliving’,and
        in this way, your Urbit is a tool for being.18 The Aegean network is the
        necessary spatial capital ‘for building cities’ by grouping individuals
        running similar programs on their Arvo servers. These cities exist as
        particular combinations of applications and tools that operate together
        in a self-governing manner and offer users both the right to self-
        determination in their own city but also the right to exit, or move
        freely from one Urbit city to another. The end result will be a virtual
        concomitanttotheimagineddynamicgeographiesofseasteading:‘avast
        archipelagoofhypercultures.Acentrelessnetworkofnetworksontopof
        the neutral Arvo and Azimuth infrastructure’ (Urbit, n.d.).
         As a ‘virtual city’ or cryptographic ‘land’, Urbit sees digital code as
        law that offers sufficient governance structures. Under these conditions,
        Urbit can follow a teleological path from a ‘corporate gated community’
        towards a ‘true city-state: a self-governing digital republic that offers the
        chance for digital freedom’.19                       
         Urbit, as virtual city, is a platform that brings together all our
         datastreams–fromemailstoheartbeats–inawaythatweourselves
         control. Can we work together to match faces in photos, without
         submitting to some panopticon in Mountain View? While the first
         step in freedom is the right to be left alone, the second is the power
         to form new intentional communities, to create and evolve a volun-
         tary definition of public space. We have no idea at all what people
         will do with this power. (Wolfe-Pauley, 2016)       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      156                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        This really feels like retrofuturism. As we have noted, as far back as
      1992 Neal Stephenson’s science-fiction novel Snow Crash featured a
      ‘metaverse’ or shared collective virtual space that appeared to users, or
      more specifically their virtual avatars, as self-contained urban environ-
      ments complete with virtual real estate governed by the Global
      MultimediaProtocolGroup.Thesephilosophiesechoanearlierideology
      of internet culture defined by a belief in transcendence from existing
      social,political,andeconomichierarchiesthroughdecentralizedcommu-
      nication systems (Ludlow, 2001). However, for Urbit, even the internet
      itself must shed its socio-technical history, its archaic programming lan-
      guage, monopolized media ecosystems dominated by a winner-takes-all
      logic, and the ‘high-velocity trash economy’ built by ‘Statist
      Keynesians’.20                                         
        Urbit is a clean-slate reimagining of networks as Patchwork govern-
      ance. Indeed, governance is at the heart of the Urbit philosophy. Urbit’s
      ‘constitution’, borrowed ‘from valid historical structures, mainly Roman
      and Anglo-American’, declares itself a digital republic complete with its
      own parliamentary structures including a consulate, senate, congress,
      andassembly.Thishierarchyofstructuresreflectsitscosmologicalorder-
      ing. The assembly is the setof all active planets, the congress is theset of
      all active stars, and the senate is the set of galaxies. Urbit’s CEO, and
      developer Raymond Pasco, currently both serve as Urbit’s two consuls
      and function as the executive authority. Specific branches of government
      arelikewisetaskedwithparticularresponsibilitiesofadministeringeither
      technical or nontechnical issues (Tlo¨n, 2016). Not surprisingly, this puts
      Urbit’s founders and its venture capital partners in excellent positions to
      govern through network ownership. Indeed, the ownership of Urbit
      galaxies has already been decided. Of Urbit’s 256 galaxies, Tlo¨n owns
      about 37 per cent; Urbit.org: 19 per cent; Tlo¨ n employees: 15 per cent
      (Yarvin owns 24 galaxies, everyone else 16); outside Tlo¨ n investors: 13
      per cent; and Urbit donors and contributors: 14 per cent. Tseng’s (2019)
      analysis of the distribution of galaxies and stars shows a clear concen-
      tration towards Tlo¨ n and its employees. Put differently, despite Urbit’s
      insistence on ‘redecentralization’ it is nonetheless prefigurative of con-
      centrated property ownership and a rigid hierarchy of the address space.
      Yet, Urbit’s creators do not concern themselves with this critique, even
      claimingintheUrbitconstitutionthat:‘Urbitshouldneverfallunderany
      kindofcentralcontrol.Alltransitionsingalaxyownershipshoulddivide
      positions, not unite them,’ and that, ‘property rights are contingent and
      accidental,notmoralormeritorious.Apropertyregisterdoesnotrecord
      whyanownerdeservessomeproperty.Ownershipisneitherarewardnor
      a right; it is a fact.’ Exit is the only constitutional right. There is no
      democratic voice as Urbit is necessarily governed by a technocratic
      elite of stars and galaxies. Planets dissatisfied with their parent star are
      free to detach and move elsewhere but they must belong somewhere.

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            157     
                                                             
        Galaxies exercise infrastructural governance only on stars that freely
        participate. In Urbit, computationalist ontologies trump any notion of
        social governance, and the only liberty is exit.     
                                                             
                                                             
        Conclusions                                          
        As we have already noted, writing almost a quarter of a century ago,
        James Dale Davidson and Lord William Rees-Mogg (father of arch-
        Brexiteer UK MP Jacob Rees-Mogg) published The Sovereign
        Individual, a book that Thiel claims to have heavily influenced his world-
        view (O’Connell, 2018). In it, they predict the eventual collapse of the
        nation-state and the eclipse of politics by corporatist initiatives
        (seasteading and Urbit easily fit this bill). Their prediction hinges on
        the acceleration of information processing by decentralized telecommu-
        nication networks. Through them, nation-states will be unable to ‘catch
        up’ with the speed of encrypted transactions, rendering existing institu-
        tions of tax-collection impossible. Commerce will migrate online, and
        ‘cyberspace’ will become ‘the ultimate offshore jurisdiction’ (Davidson
        and Rees-Mogg, 1997: 24). This ‘triumph of efficiency over power’, as
        they describe it, is interesting not only because they theorize the nation-
        state as paralyzed by ‘micro-processing’, but also because these proto-
        neoreactionaries draw specifically on hyperstitional notions such as the
        metaverse of Snow Crash (Davidson and Rees-Mogg, 1997: 179) as a
        post-neoliberalimaginary.Thistriumphispredictedtoresultintheeven-
        tual rise in violent and organized crime following the decline of nation-
        states, but also the emergence of new information assets. The virtual
        corporations and sovereign individuals envisioned by Yarvin, Land,
        Thiel, Friedman, Davidson, and the late Rees-Mogg are geographically
        dynamicentitiescapableofrapidmobilizationfromjurisdictionalauthor-
        ity. As we see it, these views are not simply speculative predictions of a
        post-neoliberal future but have played a materially key role in guiding
        capitalinvestmentpatternsinplacessuchasSiliconValley.Davidsonand
        thelateRees-MoggbotheditedStrategicInvestment,andDavidsonhim-
        self is a venture capitalist with a panache for the apocalyptic. In any
        event,theseeconomiesofpredictionallhingeonassumptionsthatcapital
        will be drawn to chaos because it can easily exit should circumstances
        change.                                              
         It is important for us to keep attending to the manner in which the
        politicalprojectsthatunderpinNRxareworkingintothesocio-technical
        infrastructures of everyday life. Projects like Urbit, and other NRx exit
        strategies such as seasteading, offer vivid imaginary resources for those
        already possessing a predilection towards social withdrawal from the
        manifestcrisesandfailuresofcontemporaryglobalcapitalism.Thefunc-
        tioning of the democratic urban form – American cities in particular –
        has been a particular target for denigration (Land, 2012).21 Instead, exit

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      158                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      to prosperous, technologically-advanced, supposedly well-functioning
      but antidemocratic city-states – Singapore, Hong Kong (before the cur-
      rent unrest at least), Dubai and the like – is set up as a model for the
      future.Suchinterpretationshaveasymbolicandapoliticalforce.Wesee
      similar processes occurring within Urbit’s critique of existing network
      architectures and power structures. True or not, these critiques work to
      advance a hyperstitious imaginary of a uniquely different network archi-
      tecturebasedonparticularbeliefsofhowdata-subjectsandcommunities
      shouldinteractthroughdecentralizedsecessionistlogics,andthepolitical
      rights or obligations (if any) that follow from them.  
        NRx architectures of exit, as Steorts (2017) observes, are powerful
      precisely because they oversimplify. Incentives are aligned with their effi-
      cientpursuit:‘Acomputerscientistwouldthinkthisway:Youjustsetup
      the rules and your mechanism follows them.’ Any notion of political
      sovereignty is, in other words, in the hands of the technologists working
      through a ‘cryptographic chain of command’. We suggest that platforms
      such as Urbit represent attempts to concretize such mechanistic compu-
      tational ‘social’ theories of a hyper-efficient neoreactionary state. The
      power to govern the conditions of exit, while likely futile in realizing
      any fantasy of fracturing the political status quo to restore a myth of
      sovereignty,nonethelesshasacertaintractionforneoreactionariesclaim-
      ing to have access to some privileged, almost mythical, understanding of
      the contemporary social order ascertained only through red-pilling.
      Here, the question of how seriously we should take the writings of
      people like Yarvin and Land on exit becomes significant. As we have
      already noted, the ease with which otherwise ‘batshit crazy’ ideas have
      becomemainstreamed inrecentyearsisperhapsamarkofthe‘newdark
      age’ in which we live (Bridle, 2018). On any definition, we are dealing
      herewithfascism(Gilroy,2019;Goldhill,2017;Hermanssonetal.,2020)
      but at the same time we would be foolish to dismiss the memetic, almost
      infectious quality that NRx and The Dark Enlightenment possess
      (O’Sullivan, 2017: 30). The so-called ‘Overton Window’ is being moved
      rightwards, and as Gilroy (2019: 5) argues, political conduct has been
      redefined; fractions of the alt-right now consider themselves Gramscians
      and Leninists, and they intend ‘to play a long game’.  
        We speculate that these fractures reinforce an emergent political order
      illustrated by projects such as Urbit and seasteading in order to provide
      material instances of exit architectures. These represent a particular kind
      of state that gestures towards imagined post-neoliberal orders character-
      ized by the fracturing of the bureaucratic administrative state and its
      replacement by ‘gov-corps’. It is worth considering what powers, if
      any, those who do not own Urbit land might have, what choices one
      would really have to exit the network, and what moral or ethical con-
      structs would govern this imagined space. Indeed, discussions of exit
      touch upon key ethical debates facing Silicon Valley concerning the

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            159     
                                                             
        extent to which tech companies should participate in such matters. Alex
        Karp, the CEO and co-founder (with Peter Thiel) of the artificial intel-
        ligence firm Palantir, argued in the Washington Post (Karp, 2019) that
        techcompanieshaveabsolutelynomoralobligationtoinfluencepolicyin
        a broadside critique of the progressive agenda: ‘when a small group of
        executives at the largest Internet companies in Silicon Valley try to
        imposetheirmoralframeworkonAmerica,somethinghasgoneseriously
        and dangerously awry.’ Putting aside for a moment the extent to which
        such moral frameworks are indeed a minority position (likely, they are
        not), or whether Karp subscribes to the principles of NRx, his view
        highlights an underlying truth behind the ‘techno-utopian right-libertar-
        ianism’ that pervades both the ethics and aesthetics of Silicon Valley
        (Armistead, 2016). Namely, that post-neoliberalism, as dominated by
        the political and cultural frameworks of tech start-ups, should be decisi-
        vely anti-political and indifferent to existing moral dilemmas precisely
        because exit will offer the transcendental mechanism for decentralized
        political change. Exit apologist Balaji Srinivasan (2013) sees the future
        as a techno-utopia because subjects can choose the ‘level of exit’ they
        desire: ‘there is this entire digital world up here which we can jack our
        brainsintoandwecanoptout.’Theobjectiveistoreducethebarriersof
        exit by fracturing the civil service and marketplace of progressive social
        theory through start-ups hyper-stimulated on billionaire finance.
        Departing from Thatcher’s infamous neoliberal rhetoric, the Dark
        Enlightenment will have such things as societies, but opt-in ones only.
        ORCID iD                                             
        RogerBurrows https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6837-1586   
                                                             
                                                             
        Notes                                                
        1. One is immediately reminded of Micronations: The Lonely Planet Guide to
          Home-Made Nations (Ryan et al., 2006).             
        2. They are available at https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/ in their ori-
          ginal form, but parts have also been revised and (self-)published in book
          format with titles such as: An Open Letter to Open-Minded Progressives; A
          Gentle Introduction to Unqualified Reservations; How Dawkins Got Pwned;
          Moldbug on Carlyle; and, of particular interest here, Patchwork: A Political
          System for the 21st Century.                       
        3. See Ratcliffe (2020) for a periodization of the output of Yarvin/Moldbug.
        4. Indeed, at one point he published articles in both this journal and Body &
          Society (Land, 1995a, 1995b).                      
        5. DescribedbyMacDougald(2015)as‘aheadycocktailofnihilism,cybernetic
          Marxism, complexity theory, numerology, jungle music, and the dystopian
          sci-fi of William Gibson and Blade Runner’. Although not foregrounded at
          the time, the cocktail also included foundational neoliberal thinkers.
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      160                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
       6. See, in particular, the brilliant account offered by O’Connell (2018) on the
         relationshipbetweenthisparticulartext,Thiel,Yarvinandpost-apocalyptic
         NRx imaginaries.                                    
       7. See https://www.seasteading.org/.                  
       8. AsSandiferhaspointedout,giventhesexualpoliticsandinherentmisogyny
         ofsomuchalt-rightthinking,itisdeeplyironicthatthismovie–thesource
         of so many celebratory alt-right metaphors – should have been directed by
         two transgender women.                              
       9. More recently, Yarvin has been writing a series of posts for The American
         Mind entitled ‘The Clear Pill’, where he develops his theory of ‘The
         Pervasive Error’: an epistemic crisis of ‘truth markets’ that has culminated
         in a paradox of ‘distributed despotism’. This ‘theory of wokeness’ specific-
         ally highlights the acceleration of progressivism with a ‘microhistory of
         mediaevolution’(i.e.socialmediaand‘new-mediasitesthatconnectedana-
         lytics directly to their editorial process’). This microhistory has vastly
         increased the ‘evolutionary efficiency of the market’ for the hegemony of
         progressive discourse and the emergence of an accelerated epistemic elite:
         ‘Theevolutionofideas,oncealazyrippleofviewsandreviews,hadbecome
         an instant viral loop. Darwin started grinding up his Adderall’ (Yarvin,
         2019a).                                             
      10. Seethefirst10minutesof‘CurtisYarvinLiveattheBasedDeleuzeRelease
         Party in LA (Mencius Moldbug)’ available at: https://www.youtube.com/
         watch?v¼RRQO3VbJsMw.                                
      11. See Moldbug/Yarvin here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼
         ZluMysK2B1E.                                        
      12. See ‘Nick Land’s Response to Tech Secessionism’ talk here, organized in
         relation to Hirschman’s distinctions: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
         v¼yJMlaupGHTM.                                      
      13. See the film by Jacob Hurwitz-Goodman and Daniel Keller made for
         DIS.ART here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼ZmESxdvegao.
      14. See also the movie Hyperstition by Christopher Roth, in which Nick Land
         andothersassociatedwith(left-)accelerationism(Gardiner,2017)appear.It
         can be viewed here: https://vimeo.com/ondemand/hyperstition.
      15. Others have invoked Thomas Pynchon-esque conspiracy theories to make
         sense ofthecontemporary re-emergence ofLand’s weirdoeuvre, describing
         him as ‘the sort of strange, half-forgotten figure that might turn up in an
         Adam Curtis documentary ten years from now’ (MacDougald, 2015).
      16. It is interesting to note that in earlier iterations of Urbit, Yarvin based the
         platform’saddresshierarchyonamonarchialsystem–‘Lords’,‘Dukes’and
         ‘Earls’ – derived from, as he put it, ‘standard Lockean libertarian home-
         steading theory’ (Lecher, 2017).                    
      17. See IDEO CoLab ‘Blueprint 2017 Talks: Galen Wolfe-Pauly on the
         Distributed Web’: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v¼9cXTGW9J9a0.
      18. Yarvin and Wolfe-Pauly in conversation on Blockchannel in 2018: ‘Virtual
         Land in the Clouds, with Urbit’: https://medium.com/blockchannel/epi-
         sode-19-virtual-land-in-the-clouds-with-urbit-1428ba98243a.
      19. Yarvin and Wolfe-Pauly in discussion on The Ether Review #46 in 2016:
         https://urbit.org/media/the-ether-review-46-curtis-yarvin-and-galen-wolfe-
         pauly-on-urbit/.                                    

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            161     
                                                             
        20. The‘high-velocitytrasheconomy’circulatesinbitcoincommunitiesandhas
          been popularized by bitcoin evangelist Pierre Rochard, exemplifying a
          decentralized accelerationist critique. See: https://twitter.com/pierre_
          rochard/status/1196828128607387648.                
        21. See, by way of example, the disturbing NRx-inspired ‘Crush the Urbanite’
          blog: https://crushtheurbanite.wordpress.com/.     
        References                                           
        Althusser, Louis (1971) Ideology and ideological state apparatuses. In:
         Althusser, Louis, Lenin and Philosophy and other Essays (trans. Ben
         Brewster). New York: Monthly Review Press, pp. 121–176.
        Ambedkar,M.(2017)Theaestheticsofthealt-right.Post-OfficeArtsJournal,11
         February. Available at: http://baltimore-art.com/2017/02/11/the-aesthetics-
         of-the-alt-right/ (accessed 5 August 2020).         
        Amoore, Louise (2019) Thinking with algorithms: Cognition and computation
         in the work of N. Katherine Hayles. Theory, Culture & Society 36(2): 3–16.
        Amoore,Louise (2020)CloudEthics:AlgorithmsandtheAttributes ofOurselves
         and Others. Durham: Duke University Press.          
        Armistead, Josephine (2016) The Silicon ideology. Available at: https://archive.
         org/details/the-silicon-ideology (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Atzori,Marcella(2017)Blockchaintechnologyanddecentralizedgovernance:Is
         the state still necessary? Journal of Governance and Regulation 6(1): 45–62.
        Beckett, Andy (2017) Accelerationism: How a fringe philosophy predicted the
         future we live in. The Guardian, 11 May. Available at: https://www.theguar-
         dian.com/world/2017/may/11/accelerationism-how-a-fringe-philosophy-pre-
         dicted-the-future-we-live-in (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Bianco, Clark (2013) Nock, Hoon, etc. for non-Vulcans (why Urbit matters).
         Popehat. Available at: https://www.popehat.com/2013/12/06/nock-hoon-etc-
         for-non-vulcans-why-urbit-matters/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Blincoe, Nick (2017) Nick Land: Alt-writer. Prospect Magazine, 18 May.
         Available at: https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/philosophy/nick-land-
         the-alt-writer (accessed 5 August 2020).            
        Bratton, Benjamin (2016) The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.                                      
        Bridle, James (2018) New Dark Age: Technology and the End of the Future.
         London: Verso.                                      
        Burrows,Roger(2019)UrbanfuturesandtheDarkEnlightenment:Aguidefor
         theperplexed.In:Jacobs,KeithandMalpass,Jeff(eds)TowardsaPhilosophy
         oftheCity:InterdisciplinaryandTransculturalPerspectivesLondon:Rowman
         and Littlefield, pp. 245–258.                       
        Campbell-Verduyn,Malcolm(ed.)(2018)BitcoinandBeyond:Cryptocurrencies,
         Blockchains, and Global Governance. Abingdon: Routledge.
        Carstens, Delphi (2009) Hyperstition – an interview with Nick Land. Available
         at: http://xenopraxis.net/readings/carstens_hyperstition.pdf (accessed 5
         August 2020).                                       
        Corbyn,Zoe¨ (2018)Decentralisation:ThenextbigstepfortheWorldWideWeb.
         TheObserver,8September.Availableat:https://www.theguardian.com/tech-
         nology/2018/sep/08/decentralisation-next-big-step-for-the-world-wide-web-
         dweb-data-internet-censorship-brewster-kahle (accessed 5August 2020).

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      162                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Cummings, Dominic (2020) Two hands are a lot – we’re hiring data scientists,
        project managers, policy experts, assorted weirdos. Available at: https://
        dominiccummings.com/2020/01/02/two-hands-are-a-lot-were-hiring-data-
        scientists-project-managers-policy-experts-assorted-weirdos/ (accessed 5
        August 2020).                                        
      Daniels, Jessie (2018) The algorithmic rise of the ‘alt-right’. Contexts 17(1):
        60–65.                                               
      Davidson,JamesDaleandRees-Mogg,William(1997)TheSovereignIndividual:
        Mastering the Transition to the Information Age. London: Touchstone.
      Dodd, Nigel (2018) The social life of bitcoin. Theory, Culture & Society 35(3):
        35–56.                                               
      Duesterberg,James(2017)Finalfantasy:Neoreactionarypoliticsandtheliberal
        imagination. The Point Magazine. Available at: https://thepointmag.com/
        2017/politics/final-fantasy-neoreactionary-politics-liberal-imagination
        (accessed 5 August 2020).                            
      Featherstone, Mike and Burrows, Roger (eds) (1995) Cyberspace/Cyberbodies/
        Cyberpunk: Cultures of Technological Embodiment. London: SAGE.
      Fosdem(2018)Urbit:Thepersonalserver.Fosdem.Availableat:https://archive.
        fosdem.org/2018/schedule/event/urbit/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Galloway, Alexander and Noys, Benjamin (2014) Crash and burn: Debating
        accelerationism. 3:am magazine. Available at: https://www.3ammagazine.
        com/3am/crash-and-burn-debating-accelerationism/ (accessed 5 August
        2020).                                               
      Gardiner,Michael(2017)Critiqueofaccelerationism.Theory,Culture&Society
        34(1): 29–52.                                        
      Gilroy,Paul(2019)Agonisticbelonging:Thebanalityofgood,the‘altright’and
        the need for sympathy. Open Cultural Studies 3(1): 1–14.
      Goldhill, Olivia (2017) The neo-fascist philosophy that underpins both the alt-
        right and Silicon Valley technophiles. Quartz. Available at: https://qz.com/
        1007144/the-neo-fascist-philosophy-that-underpins-both-the-alt-right-and-
        silicon-valley-technophiles/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Gray, Rosie (2017) Behind the internet’s anti-democracy movement. The
        Atlantic. Available at: https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2017/02/
        behind-the-internets-dark-anti-democracy-movement/516243/ (accessed 5
        August 2020).                                        
      Haider,Shuja(2017)Thedarknessattheendofthetunnel:Artificialintelligence
        and neoreaction. Viewpoint Magazine. Available at: https://www.viewpoint-
        mag.com/2017/03/28/the-darkness-at-the-end-of-the-tunnel-artificial-intelli-
        gence-and-neoreaction/ (accessed 5 August 2020).     
      Hermansson,Patrik,Lawrence,David,Mulhall,JoeandMurdoch,Simon(eds)
        (2020) The International Alt-Right: Fascism for the 21st Century? London:
        Routledge.                                           
      Hirschman,Albert(1970)Exit,VoiceandLoyalty:ResponsestoDeclineinForms,
        Organizations and States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Karp, Alex (2019) I’m a tech CEO, and I don’t think tech CEOs should be
        making policy. The Washington Post, 5 September. Available at: https://
        www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/policy-decisions-should-be-made-by-
        elected-representatives-not-silicon-valley/2019/09/05/e02a38dc-cf61-11e9-
        87fa-8501a456c003_story.html (accessed 5 August 2020).

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            163     
                                                             
        Klein, Jessica (2019) Here’s the Dark Enlightenment explainer you never
         wanted. BreakerMag. Available at: https://breakermag.com/heres-the-dark-
         enlightenment-explainer-you-never-wanted/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Land, Nick (1995a) Machines and technocultural complexity: The challenge of
         the Deleuze-Guattari conjunction. Theory, Culture & Society 12(2): 131–140.
        Land,Nick(1995b)Meat(orhowtokillOedipusincyberspace).Body&Society
         1(3–4): 191–204.                                    
        Land, Nick (2012) The Dark Enlightenment. Available at: http://www.thedar-
         kenlightenment.com/thedark-enlightenment-by-nick-land/ (accessed 5
         August 2020).                                       
        Land, Nick (2017) A quick-and-dirty introduction to accelerationism. Jacobite.
         Available at: https://jacobitemag.com/2017/05/25/a-quick-and-dirty-intro-
         duction-to-accelerationism/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Lecher, Colin (2017) Alt-right darling Mencius Moldbug wanted to destroy
         democracy. Now he wants to sell you web services. The Verge. Available
         at: https://www.theverge.com/2017/2/21/14671978/alt-right-mencius-mold-
         bug-urbit-curtis-yarvin-tlon (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Lewis, Paul, Conn, David and Pegg, David (2020) UK government using confi-
         dentialpatientdataincoronavirusresponse.TheGuardian,12April.Available
         at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/12/uk-government-using-
         confidential-patient-data-in-coronavirus-response (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Ludlow, Peter (ed.) (2001) Crypto Anarchy, Cyberstates, and Pirate Utopias.
         Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.                           
        Lynch, Casey R. (2017) ‘Vote with your feet’: Neoliberalism, the democratic
         nation-state,andutopianenclavelibertarianism.PoliticalGeography59:82–91.
        MacDougald,Park(2015)Thedarknessbeforetheright.TheAwl.Availableat:
         https://www.theawl.com/2015/09/the-darkness-before-the-right/ (accessed 5
         August 2020).                                       
        MacDougald, Park (2016) Accelerationism, left and right. Available at: https://
         pmacdougald.wordpress.com/2016/04/14/accelerationism-left-and-right/
         (accessed 5 August 2020).                           
        Majer, Jane (2016) Dark Money: The Hidden History of the Billionaires Behind
         the Rise of the Radical Right. London: Penguin.     
        Moldbug, Mencius (2007a) Universalism: Postwar Progressivism as Christian
         Sect.Availableat:https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2007/07/univers-
         alism-postwar-progressivism-as/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Moldbug, Mencius (2007b) A Formalist Manifesto. Available at: https://www.
         unqualified-reservations.org/2007/04/formalist-manifesto-originally-posted/
         (accessed 5 August 2020).                           
        Moldbug, Mencius (2008) Patchwork: A Political System for the 21st Century.
         Available at: https://www.unqualified-reservations.org/2008/11/patchwork-
         positive-vision-part-1/ (accessed 5 August 2020).   
        Moldbug, Mencius (2009) Moldbug on Carlyle. Available at: https://www.
         unqualified-reservations.org/2009/07/carlyle-in-20th-century-fascism-and/
         (accessed 5 August 2020).                           
        Mouffe, Chantal (2019) For a Left Populism. London: Verso.
        Mulhall, Joe (2020) Andrew Sabisky’s job at No 10 shows how mainstream the
         alt-right has become. The Guardian, 18 February. Available at: https://www.

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      164                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
        theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/feb/18/andrew-sabisky-job-no-10-alt-
        right-adviser (accessed 5 August 2020).              
      Murphy,Justin(2019)BasedDeleuze:TheReactionaryLeftismofGillesDeleuze.
        London: Other Life.                                  
      Nagle, Angela (2017) Kill All Normies: Online Culture Wars from 4Chan and
        Tumblr to Trump and the Alt-Right. Winchester: Zero Books.
      O’Brien,Luke(202)Thefar-righthelpedcreatetheworld’smostpowerfulfacial
        recognition technology. The Huffington Post, 7 April. Available at: https://
        www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/clearview-ai-facial-recognition-alt-right_n_
        5e7d028bc5b6cb08a92a5c48?ri18n¼true (accessed 5 August 2020).
      O’Connell, Mark (2018) Why Silicon Valley billionaires are prepping for the
        Apocalypse in New Zealand. The Guardian, 15 February. Available at:
        https://www.theguardian.com/news/2018/feb/15/why-silicon-valley-billio-
        naires-are-prepping-for-the-apocalypse-in-new-zealand (accessed 5 August
        2020).                                               
      O’Sullivan, Simon (2017) Accelerationism and hyperstition. Cyclops Journal 2:
        11–45.                                               
      Parisi, Luciana (2019) Critical computation: Digital automata and general arti-
        ficial thinking. Theory, Culture & Society 36(2): 89–121.
      Quirk, JoewithFriedman, Patri (2017)Seasteading:HowFloating NationsWill
        Restore the Environment, Enrich the Poor, Cure the Sick, and Liberate
        Humanity from Politicians. New York: Free Press.     
      Rao, Sonia (2020) How the red pill got to Elon Musk, The Washington Post, 18
        May. Available at: https://www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2020/
        05/18/elon-musk-ivanka-trump-matrix-red-pill/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Ratcliffe,Peter(2020)RebootingtheLeviathan:NRxandthemillennium. b2o:
        an online journal (Special Issue: The New Extremism) 4(2). Available at:
        http://www.boundary2.org/2020/04/jonathan-ratcliffe-rebooting-the-
        leviathan-nrx-and-the-millennium/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Reynolds, Simon (2009) Renegade academia: The Cybernetic Culture Research
        Unit. Available at: http://energyflashbysimonreynolds.blogspot.co.uk/2009/
        11/renegade-academia-cybernetic-culture.html (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Ruger, William (2011) Milton Friedman. London: Bloomsbury.
      Ryan, John, Dunford, George and Sellars, Simon (2006) Micronations: Lonely
        Planet Guide to Home-Made Nations. Melbourne: Lonely Planet.
      Sandifer,Elizabeth(2017)Neoreaction:ABasilisk:EssaysonandAroundtheAlt
        Right. Eruditorum Press.                             
      Srinivasan, Balaji (2013) Silicon Valley’s ultimate exit. Available at: https://
        genius.com/Balaji-srinivasan-silicon-valleys-ultimate-exit-annotated
        (accessed 5 August 2020).                            
      Startup Cities Institute (2014) Startup Cities: A New Approach to Reform.
        Guatemala City: Universidad Francisco Marroquin.     
      Steinberg, Philip E., Nyman, Elizabeth and Caraccioli, Mauro J. (2012) Atlas
        swam: Freedom, capital, and floating sovereignties in the seasteading vision.
        Antipode 44(4): 1532–1550.                           
      Steorts, Jason L. (2017) Against Mencius Moldbug’s neoreaction. National
        Review. Available at: https://www.nationalreview.com/2017/06/problems-
        mencius-moldbug-neoreaction/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
      Stephenson, Neal (1992) Snow Crash. New York: Bantam Books.

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Smith and Burrows                            165     
                                                             
        Tait,Joshua(2019)MenciusMolbugandneoreaction.In:Sedgwick,Mark(ed.)
         Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to Liberal
         Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.         
        Thiel,Peter(2009)Theeducationofalibertarian.Availableat:http://www.cato-
         unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian (accessed 5 August
         2020).                                              
        Thiel, Peter (2014) Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the Future.
         London: Virgin Books.                               
        Tlo¨n (2016) Interim Constitution. Urbit. Available at: https://urbit.org/blog/
         interim-constitution/ (accessed 5 August 2020).     
        Topinka,Robert(2019)‘Backtoapastthatwasfuturistic’:Thealt-rightandthe
         uncanny form of racism. b2o: an online journal (Special Issue: The New
         Extremism) 4(2). Available at: https://www.boundary2.org/2019/10/robert-
         topinka-back-to-a-past-that-was-futuristic-the-alt-right-and-the-uncanny-
         form-of-racism/ (accessed 5 August 2020).           
        Tseng, Francis (2019) Who owns the stars?: The trouble with Urbit. Available
         at: http://distributedweb.care/posts/who-owns-the-stars/ (accessed 5 August
         2020).                                              
        Urbit (2016) Welcome to Urbit. Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
         v¼g1qroWiZF90&feature¼youtu.be (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Urbit(n.d.)UnderstandingUrbit.Availableat:https://urbit.org/understanding-
         urbit/ (accessed 5 August 2020).                    
        Volpicelli,Gian(2020)CanDominicCummingsreallyrunBritainlikeastartup?
         Probably not. Wired, 14 January. Available at: https://www.wired.co.uk/art-
         icle/dominic-cummings-blog-civil-service (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Wendling, Mike (2018) Alt-Right: From 4Chan to the White House. London:
         Pluto Press.                                        
        Wolf, Rachel (2020) Whitehall is woefully unprepared for Dominic Cummings’
         trueplantoreformthestate.TheTelegraph,1January.Availableat:https://
         www.telegraph.co.uk/politics/2020/01/01/whitehall-woefully-unprepared-
         dominic-cummings-true-plan-reform/?WT.mc_id¼tmg_share_tw (accessed 5
         August 2020).                                       
        Wolfe-Pauley, Galen (2016) An Urbit overview. Available at: https://urbit.org/
         blog/an-urbit-overview/ (accessed 5 August 2020).   
        Wolfe-Pauley, Galen (2019) Azimuth as multipass. Available at: https://urbit.
         org/blog/azimuth-as-multipass/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Yarvin, Curtis (2019a) The clear pill, Part 2 of 5: A theory of pervasive error.
         TheAmericanMind.Availableat:https://americanmind.org/essays/the-clear-
         pill-part-2-of-5-a-theory-of-pervasive-error/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Yarvin, Curtis (2019b) A founder’s farewell. Urbit Blog. Available at: https://
         urbit.org/posts/a-founders-farewell/ (accessed 5 August 2020).
        Yarvin, Curtis, Monk, Philip, Dyudin, Anton and Pasco, Raymond (2016)
         Urbit: A solid-state interpreter. Available at: https://media.urbit.org/white-
         paper.pdf (accessed 5 August 2020).                 
        Harrison Smith is a Lecturer in Digital Media and Society in the
        Department of Sociological Studies at the University of Sheffield, UK.

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      166                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(6)
                                                             
      Roger Burrows is Professor of Cities in the School of Architecture,
      Planning and Landscape at Newcastle University, UK.    
                                                             
                                                             
      This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘Post-
      Neoliberalism?’, edited by William Davies and Nicholas Gane.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             