[PAGE 1]
 1103527                                                     
 research-article2022 TCS0010.1177/02632764221103527Theory, Culture & SocietyStaab and Thiel
                                                             
                                                             
       Special Issue: A New Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere?
                                             Theory, Culture & Society
       Social Media and  the Digital         2022, Vol. 39(4) 129 –143
                                              © The Author(s) 2022
       Structural Transformation                             
                                              Article reuse guidelines:
       of the Public Sphere               sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                        httpDs:O//dIo: i1.o0r.g1/1107.711/0727/60322673267462422121110033552277
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
       Philipp Staab                                         
       Humboldt University of Berlin                         
                                                             
       Thorsten Thiel                                        
       Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article explores the question of how to understand social media following the
       Habermasian theory of the structural transformation of the public sphere. We argue
       for a return to political-economic fundamentals as the basis for analysing the public
       sphere and seek to establish a characteristic connection between digital-behavioural
       control and singularised audiences in the context of proprietary markets. In the digital
       constellation, it is less a matter of immobilising the citizen as a consumer but rather of
       their political activation – albeit in conditions under which commercial interests have
       primacy: privatisation without privatism.             
       Keywords                                              
       digital capitalism, Jürgen Habermas, public sphere, social media, structural
       transformation                                        
                                                             
                                                             
       The relationship between the public sphere and the economy is at the heart of Jürgen
       Habermas’s classic analysis of The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere
       (Habermas, 1991). According to Habermas, the historical constitution of the bourgeois
       public sphere was predicated on the role of private property as acquired and reproduced
       in the early capitalist (market-based) exchange of goods. The bourgeois entrepreneur
       acquired private power along with private wealth; this, however, did not translate into a
       comparable ability to shape the public sphere in light of the then still predominant prin-
       ciple of monarchical representation. Against this background – and connected with the
                                                             
                                                             
       Corresponding author: Thorsten Thiel. Email: thorsten.thiel@wzb.eu
       TCS Online Forum: https://www.theoryculturesociety.org
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      130                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      validity claim of patriarchal, bourgeois nuclear families and a specific literary culture –
      the bourgeois public sphere developed. It became a vehicle for public criticism of monar-
      chical representation and a place for the articulation of the interests of autonomous,
      largely equal, bourgeois market participants in the political sphere. Somewhat simplisti-
      cally, one could say that the triumph of market principles was a condition for the emer-
      gence of the bourgeois public sphere. The self-confidence individuals acquired as market
      citizens was brought to bear in the field of public interests.
        Likewise, in his analysis of the disintegration of the bourgeois public sphere,
      Habermas describes material changes as the trigger: he argues that economic concentra-
      tion effects and the social inequalities generated by the market initiated a second stage of
      the transformation of the public sphere from the late 19th century onwards. The horizon-
      tal market of small traders was replaced by industrial capitalism, which was dominated
      by large companies on the one hand and dependent, proletarian wage labour on the other.
      Two consequences were of central importance: first, there was the high concentration of
      economic power in the hands of individual entrepreneurs (or entrepreneurial families)
      and the simultaneous proletarianisation of large parts of the population, which made the
      idea of free and equal market actors increasingly implausible. Second, there were the
      welfare state interventions developed in response to rampant impoverishment, which
      changed the relationship between the state and society.
        In the ‘industrial society constituted as a social-welfare state’ (Habermas, 1991: 229),
      the representational function of the bourgeois family faded as late bourgeois nuclear
      families increasingly retreated into privacy and hedonism. The establishment of the mass
      media in the form of radio and television and the associated rise of the culture industry
      are hence characteristic of the third stage of the transformation, which culminated in the
      mass society of the 20th century and its obsession with consumption. The citizens of the
      public sphere were now primarily consumers; the critical discourse was undermined by
      advertising and distraction. Building on early critical theory, Habermas diagnosed a
      return to unidirectional communication, a refeudalisation in which private actors brought
      their interests to the privatised public in the form of monarchical representation.
        This brief summary of the argument of the structural transformation of the public
      sphere shows how important the materialist underpinnings of the transformation were for
      Habermas’s original theory. This theory draws its strength from a combination of three
      elements: the functional logic of specific forms of media (literary criticism, print-media
      conflict over public opinion, mass-media entertainment), the subjectivity of the public
      (bourgeois self-consciousness, industrial class polarisation, late capitalist consumerism)
      and the surrounding structures of accumulation (bourgeois entrepreneurship, industrial
      monopoly capitalism, Fordism). Although the historically informed debate linking socio-
      logical and economic aspects is the basis for Habermas’s later work, it is not revised in
      light of this later work or by the political theories of the public sphere formulated in its
      wake. The relationship between the public sphere and the market is thus generally and
      abstractly cited as a perennially problematic factor, but the analysis in later writings
      focuses mainly on the interface between the organised public sphere (especially civil
      society) and the political process. The fact that the structural transformation is ongoing
      is an issue that is addressed in these later works – transnationalisation and the digital
      transformation are identified as its expression – but its reconstruction for contemporary

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               131     
                                                             
       society is less comprehensive and rather understood as a change in media which also
       affects social dynamics.                              
        Our concern in this text is to provide an updated understanding of the triad of medial-
       ity, subjectivity and accumulation that is constitutive of the classical theory of structural
       transformation. We do this by formulating a proposal for the analysis and critique of
       social media and its role in the contemporary public sphere. Because social media only
       represents a specific part of the current hybrid media system, any generalisation of its
       logics can merely be described as an experimental hypothesis. Nevertheless, we argue
       that social media has become so important for the constitution of the democratic public
       sphere that a better understanding of it is essential for a critique of the contemporary
       public sphere.                                        
        The text advances two theses: first, concerning the phenomenon of social media itself,
       we argue that social media is characterised by a specific interrelation of digital behav-
       ioural control (mediality), singularised audiences and a characteristic proprietary market
       form. Second, and based on this, we interpret the digital transformation as a new, fourth
       stage of the structural transformation: in this stage, the role of the citizen once again
       shifts from the politically passive consumer to an active and expressive role. However,
       this is not (or not solely) realised as a societally oriented political activity: representation
       is privatised but without the privatism typical of mass society. A commercial politicisa-
       tion emerges in which economic motives always threaten to corrupt the political.
        In the following, we will initially (I) return to the development of the political theory
       of the public sphere and explicate how socio-economic aspects have increasingly faded
       in the later work of Jürgen Habermas as well as in the theories of the public sphere that
       have followed. Then, (II) we will present the three theorems for the socio-economic
       interpretation of the digital structural transformation of the public sphere, which proceed
       from the dimensions of mediality (data behaviourism: II.1), subjectivity (singularisation:
       II.2) and accumulation (the primacy of proprietary markets: II.3). In the last section (III),
       we will then contextualise these findings in relation to the theory of the structural trans-
       formation of the public sphere by discussing the transition from the principle of mass-
       societal-monarchical representation to that of digital-privatised representation as well as
       the inclusion of socio-economic analysis in the discussion on political theory.
       I The Political Theory of the Public Sphere in Transition
       The relationship between the public sphere and the economy is already embodied in the
       ancient distinction between the private household (oikos) and the public affair, the res
       publica. It was not until the modern era that this ideal of two separate spheres in a rela-
       tionship of normative subordination was transformed. The differentiation of society was
       driven by political changes (such as territorial states), economic changes (such as early
       capitalism) and media-related changes (such as the printing press). The public sphere and
       the realm of institutionalised politics became more clearly differentiated and the increas-
       ingly popular liberal understanding of the public sphere defined it very broadly as the
       general, even non-political sphere of visible social life. In this context, market relations
       were understood as a form of public relationship. The relations between markets and the
       public sphere were also understood to be positive, since trade relations were viewed as a
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      132                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      civilising force and the marketplace of ideas was thought to be innovative in promoting
      progress (Hirschman, 1982).                            
        The great achievement of the Habermasian theory of the structural transformation of
      the public sphere is to have revolutionised this long simplified conception of the public
      sphere – which had been viewed as a politically diffuse phenomenon that was unrelated
      to specific forms of media and mainly stabilised by the virtuous attitudes of citizens –
      and thus to have established a more comprehensive political theory of the public sphere.
      As described in the introduction, Habermas’s work on structural transformation, first
      published in 1962, explicates the complex relationship between the economy, the devel-
      opment of the public sphere and democratisation. At the centre of the analysis are the
      reciprocal relationships between mediality, subjectivation and accumulation. Habermas
      thus goes beyond previous critical theory, especially that of Max Horkheimer and
      Theodor W. Adorno, who, with their diagnosis of the culture industry, identified a central
      mechanism of the mass media public sphere and decoded it economically but did not
      systematically address the position of the public sphere in the political system. The the-
      ory of the structural transformation, on the other hand, represents an attempt to uncover
      the political meaning of the public sphere. Habermas criticised the development of the
      public sphere in the Western democracies of the 1950s, which, in his view, (re)institu-
      tionalised a feudal structure of one-sided representation through the focus on consump-
      tion and entertainment.                                
        Habermas’s great scepticism towards the mass media public sphere and the descrip-
      tion presented in his work on the structural transformation represent the foundation of
      his lifelong examination of the public sphere, but his approach changed decisively in
      the following decades: the assumption that the modern public sphere was constituted by
      capitalism and shaped by the mass media remained stable, but the capacity of a demo-
      cratic public sphere to nevertheless emerge and assert itself in this context became more
      important. To explain this, Habermas constantly introduced new elements: from the
      possibility that capitalism could be tamed by the welfare state (Habermas, 1976) to
      discourse ethics (Habermas, 1984) and the role of civil society (Habermas, 1996), to the
      investigation of systemic states of equilibrium in complex democracies (Habermas,
      2006).                                                 
        For Habermas, digitalisation and the digital public sphere represent a qualitative leap
      and thus a structural change, but he no longer devotes the same analytical attention to this
      upheaval as he once did to the mass media. According to him, digitalisation adds new
      aspects to the dangers of mass media democracy, such as unequal access to discursive
      power (agenda-setting, chances of manipulation): the centrifugal forces of this ‘bubble’-
      inducing communicative structure. Habermas treats online publics as if they were struc-
      turally separate from ‘normal’ publics but amplifies their shortcomings. He fears that in
      the digital public sphere the possibility of inclusive and society-wide discourse – which,
      despite all the risks of domination and manipulation, still existed in the mass media pub-
      lic sphere – gets irrevocably lost. At the same time, the new form of public sphere – con-
      trary to what was hoped for at the beginning of the digital revolution – is just as susceptible
      to democratic pathologies as the old one (Habermas, 2006). However, this fragmentation
      hypothesis is barely elaborated. In essence, Habermas reproduces the criticism of the
      development of filter bubbles and echo chambers as an effect of algorithmic dispersion.

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               133     
                                                             
       He acknowledges that a socio-economic analysis would be of great benefit but has not
       attempted to elaborate one himself (Habermas, 2022).  
        Likewise, deliberative democratic theory, which builds on Habermas’s work, devotes
       little systematic attention to the question of digital structural transformation and its
       socio-economic drivers. Of course, it examines how systematic distortions in a society’s
       discursive capacities can be countered; the theoretical programme has also expanded
       from normative questions to more empirical ones (Elstub et al., 2016). Yet, although the
       spectrum of institutions studied today ranges from mini-publics to the connections
       between different discursive spaces – that is, deliberative systems – the analytical cri-
       tique of socio-economic inequalities and power imbalances remains surprisingly under-
       developed. And even the related questions of mediality and subjectivity are predominantly
       uncharted territory. The analysis of the digital structural transformation is therefore one-
       sided: digitality is recognised as significant, but the analysis mainly examines the effects
       attributed to it, and, above all, the possible corrective instruments, rather than the socio-
       technical dynamics and their causes (Landemore, 2020). Compared to Habermas’s clas-
       sical analysis, deliberative democratic theory therefore remains depthless and mainly
       uses idealised juxtapositions of, for example, face-to-face interactions, mass media
       structures and digital tools to make its point.       
        Overall, with regard to the development of a political theory of the public sphere, we
       arguably do not have a political theory of mediatised democracy in the proper sense
       (Hofmann, 2019). The political theoretical discourse on digital public spheres is concep-
       tually too one-sided, and it overlooks the interplay of sociological, technological-media
       and economic factors (Benson, 2009; Berg et al., 2020).
       II The Market and the Public Sphere in the Context of 
       Social Media                                          
       The fact that an analysis of the systematic connection between capitalist development,
       historical subjectivity and media forms has been neglected by the political theory of the
       public sphere is problematic for an analysis of the present, for both theoretical and
       empirical reasons – and motivates our proposal to update Habermas’s theory of structural
       transformation. Before doing so, we must clarify two points. First, we need to briefly
       delineate the digital public sphere and justify why we are focusing specifically on the
       narrower field of social media in this analysis; second, we want to take a look at the
       research to date on social media and examine the extent to which our social theoretical
       proposal has already been described there.            
        The digitality of today’s societies is based on the fact that almost every action and
       communication can be digitally recorded, operationalised and recursively turned into the
       object of subsequent action. Digital public spheres are characterised by algorithmicity,
       many-to-many communication, data collection and much more, and not just by the fact
       that they take place on a screen (Stalder, 2018). In the following analysis, however, we
       will partially ignore the complex multiformity of digital publics and instead focus solely
       on their currently most dominant manifestation: social media. The reason for this is two-
       fold: first, we assume that the functional logic of the digital public sphere will become
       particularly evident in an analysis of social media. Second, the mass media system,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      134                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      which is still undoubtedly of central importance, has been profoundly reconstructed by
      social media, so that today, it is best understood as a hybrid media system (Chadwick,
      2013). Hence, while an analysis of social media alone cannot enable us to understand the
      media system as a whole, social media is a particularly good place to start when consid-
      ering the structuring of the news system and political/social communication with a view
      to understanding the actual change that has taken place in recent decades.
        The digital public sphere is, of course, a booming topic in social science research
      quite apart from political theory. The question therefore arises as to how the connection
      of interest here, namely between capitalism and the public sphere, is discussed in the
      broad field of studies on social media and whether the social theoretical dimension that
      has been neglected in the debates on democratic theory can be found here.
        Roughly speaking, the scholarship on social media can be divided into two parts: on
      the one hand, there are publications that directly address platforms as instruments of
      capitalist accumulation, such as the writings of Nick Srnicek (2016) or Christian Fuchs
      (2020). In these works, the particular logic of the extraction and use of personal data is
      reconstructed and the resulting findings are then placed in the broader analytical context
      of the development of capitalism. Yet, authors in this field shed little light on mediality
      and subjectivity. Studies from the other direction are centrally interested in describing
      the dynamics of digital publics. Only in recent times has the importance of economic
      incentives for platform companies been emphasised more strongly. Originally, the focus
      was on the user experience in social media, its affordances and the resulting social
      dynamics. While early work in this direction focused on technically induced dynamics,
      contemporary research in communication and media studies is more differentiated and
      reflexive (Bennett and Pfetsch, 2018). In terms of economic analysis, however, consid-
      eration is usually limited to one or two essential mechanisms – mainly the monopoly
      position of the central companies (Hindman, 2018). The self-reinforcing logic of these
      economic settings is then invoked to explain the high affectivity of digital communica-
      tion or even the willingness of platform providers to promote polarising communications
      (Gillespie, 2018). While this strand of research places mediality at the heart of its consid-
      erations and also talks about accumulation, it does not refer to historically specific forms
      of subjectivation, as Habermas originally emphasised.  
        In the following three subsections, we will therefore reconstruct the dimensions cen-
      tral to Habermas’s original analysis (mediality, subjectivity and accumulation) with the
      help of three authors who have synthesised the multitude of empirical studies and find-
      ings in a theoretically comprehensive way: Shoshana Zuboff, Andreas Reckwitz and
      Philipp Staab.                                         
      II.1 Mediality: Data Behaviourism                      
      The point of reference in the field of mediality is Shoshana Zuboff’s influential study of
      surveillance capitalism (Zuboff, 2019). At the heart of Zuboff’s analysis is the data gen-
      erated in the context of the commercial internet, especially data that can be attributed to
      individual user profiles. Data is, first and foremost, the by-product of digital communica-
      tion: whenever we communicate, we leave digital traces. According to Zuboff’s account,
      this ‘data as a by-product’ was discovered – first by Google and Facebook – as the
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               135     
                                                             
       actually profitable raw material of the commercial internet. Instead of treating their own
       products as such and selling them in portions or via user licences, they recognised the
       secondary value of personal data. This data can be used to create detailed profiles of
       individuals, which can be converted into money via advertising. The raw material,
       namely data, is extracted via surveillance processes, which, in Zuboff’s view, form the
       very core of digital mediality. Since capital imperatives are at work, this extraction
       machinery must constantly expand. According to Zuboff, in recent years, increasing
       numbers of companies have begun to centre their value creation on surveillance profits,
       which is why she assumes that surveillance capitalism will rapidly advance. In this line
       of argument, the appropriation of data by surveillance capitalist corporations reflects the
       rise of an economic logic that is not focused on the resource-efficient production of
       physical products but rather on measuring, influencing and ultimately controlling our
       behaviour.                                            
        Zuboff invests great effort in lending suggestive power to the thesis that surveil-
       lance capitalism is about to become the guiding paradigm of the entire economy. Yet,
       a sober reading suggests that it is a description of the operational logics of advertising-
       financed platforms – especially social media platforms – that exploit their specific
       mediality. Unlike the classical mass media of the 20th century, social media is not
       unidirectional (one-to-many). Instead, the recipients of information are also senders of
       it. In Zuboff’s work, a phenomenon that has long been described as the multidirection-
       ality of communication (many-to-many communication, user-generated content, etc.)
       is analytically inverted by the insight that the actual communication generates obser-
       vational data that a third party – the mediating platform – uses, which creates a strong
       vested interest in structuring the communication. This shatters the idea of horizontal or
       even domination-free communication. Instead, a triadic constellation emerges in which
       platform providers, which occupy a privileged position, analyse users and seek to
       influence their behaviour. The democratic promise of bidirectional communication is
       corrupted; an economic-exploitative dimension is ever present. The problem is exacer-
       bated by the emergence of tools for targeted manipulation. In order to adapt content to
       meet individual tastes and especially to create personalised advertising, the so-called
       ‘behavioural surplus’ (Zuboff, 2019: 65) is aggregated and exploited. Zuboff’s analyti-
       cal description of the horizons of surveillance capitalist practice is of central impor-
       tance in this context: the operators of social media platforms have long since shifted
       from measuring and elaborately processing personal data to a logic of ‘behavioural
       control’. Their goal is neither the aggregation of historical data nor its processing to
       forecast future behaviour. The actual aim has long been to create specific behavioural
       patterns.                                             
        The intellectual framework for this is the guiding principle of data-centred behaviour-
       ism (Rouvroy, 2013), according to which choices in the digital space should be designed
       to generate specific behaviour. This is done, for example, through personalised content
       or through interfaces that limit possible variances in user behaviour. Through their
       design, social media platforms effectively restrict, control and channel users’ actions.
       This can be described as behaviourist construction, because – following a socio-physicist
       understanding of society (Pentland, 2015) – the aim is to generate or prevent a specific
       human behaviour through the control of environments. In the context of digital publics,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      136                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      the focus is usually on acts of consumption: advertising is integrated into user interfaces
      in ways that make users more likely to make purchasing decisions.
                                                             
      II.2 Subjectivity: The Principle of Singularisation    
      Zuboff’s approach is strongly influenced by structural theory and sees users’ actions as
      ultimately determined by the structures of capitalist domination. The recent theoretical
      history of sociology usually understands such constructions as theoretical simplifications
      and insists that the relationship between structure and action is more recursive (Giddens,
      1984). Following Habermas’s triad of mediality, subjectivity and accumulation, the
      question immediately arises as to what kind of subject can actually be addressed in the
      context of data behaviourism – or, underpinned by sociological scepticism towards
      techno-deterministic constructions: what motivates subjects to participate in processes
      designed to manipulate them?                           
        One answer to this question is provided by scholarship that conceptualises social
      media as part of a digital gift economy (Elder-Vass, 2016; Fourcade and Kluttz, 2020).
      According to this, large parts of the commercial internet consist of a gift economy, as
      users do not pay money for many services. Social media could also be seen as free ser-
      vices in a simplified perspective. If we interpret subjects primarily as marginal utility
      optimisers, we can conclude that social media is popular primarily because it costs noth-
      ing. This argument chimes with how internet corporations describe themselves – they
      present the exchange of certain services (such as a social media network) for personal
      data as a fair and largely transparent, non-monetary act of exchange: a useful service for
      some personal information.                             
        Sociology, of course, usually operates with more complex subject theories, and for
      good reason. Andreas Reckwitz’s The Society of Singularities (2020) is probably the
      most ambitious approach to answering the question of the subject in digital behaviour-
      ism. According to Reckwitz, the present is characterised by a radical individualisation,
      which he expresses with the concept of singularisation. Whereas Ulrich Beck’s original
      individualisation thesis still sought to describe the release of individuals into ‘self-
      responsibility’ and ‘self-optimization’, singularisation means ‘the more complex pursuit
      of uniqueness and exceptionality, which has not only become a subjective desire but also
      a paradoxical social expectation’ (Reckwitz, 2020: 3). Regarding social media in particu-
      lar, Reckwitz recognises the great effort subjects make when staging uniqueness and
      identifies digital platforms as ‘infrastructure for the fabrication of singularities’
      (Reckwitz, 2020: 168).                                 
        According to Reckwitz, the platforms perform a dual singularisation function. On the
      one hand, they are themselves engines for the production of the unique. For example, the
      logic of data collection and profiling, which the platforms operate for their advertising
      customers, amounts to the highly individual measurement of the individuals in question.
      These are mechanically singularised ‘behind their backs’ (Reckwitz, 2020: 183). Here,
      his approach is similar to that of Zuboff.             
        But unlike Zuboff, Reckwitz also has a theory of the demand side of digital publics
      in the context of social media. The singularised subjects are not primarily produced by
      the technology that seeks to control their behaviour. Rather, the strength of social media
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               137     
                                                             
       grows from the fertile soil of the individual’s need to stage their uniqueness. These
       needs have their origins in a dynamic of singularisation that can be explored in terms
       of cultural sociology, which no longer rewards conformity with the crowd but rather
       the presentation of exceptionality. Social media functions as a ‘culture machine’ by
       ensuring ‘the omnipresence of culture and affectivity’ (Reckwitz, 2020: 169). It is this
       permanent presence of affective stimuli that makes social media so interesting as a
       vehicle of singularisation.                           
        Social media encourages the formation of entities that describe themselves as unique,
       both on the individual and on a group level. The distinction between commercial and
       political content in this context is basically irrelevant; the only important thing is that the
       content facilitates individual profiling. On the individual level, according to Reckwitz,
       this new form of media transforms the personal and private into something public or at
       least semi-public. This also applies to ‘neo-communities’ that are grouped around spe-
       cific, particularist interests (Reckwitz, 2020: 179f.). Consequently, we are dealing with a
       logic of social fragmentation at the individual and the group level, which has resulted in
       the formation of increasingly singularised subjects and communities. Since they are pri-
       marily constituted affectively, their half-life is usually limited. The ‘compulsory social
       orientation towards the particular can’, therefore, not only ‘lead to an erosion of the
       general’ but also generates collective entities that are characterised by an ‘affective actu-
       alism’ and are relatively unstable precisely because of this (Reckwitz, 2020: 193f.).
       II.3 Accumulation: The Primacy of Proprietary Markets 
       So how can we understand the emergence and current manifestation of the interplay
       between digital behaviourism and singularised audiences that characterises social media?
       In our view, the application of a political economy perspective to changing patterns of
       accumulation provides the best answer to this question, as it makes long developmental
       trajectories recognisable and allows a direct connection to aspects of mediality and sub-
       jectivity to be established.                          
        If we look first at the historical-political-economic trajectories, we find that social
       media is the result of the long rise of contemporary information and communication
       technologies. Their triumphal march began in the 1970s at the very latest, when the first
       venture capital investors discovered the computer industry as a crucial field of future
       economic growth (Perez, 2003; Mazzucato, 2013). In the advanced economies of the
       OECD, the long phase of stable economic growth that had characterised the immediate
       post-war period was coming to an end. The Fordism of the 1950s and ’60s was, in a
       historically new sense, a ‘consumption-based economy’ (Crouch, 2009), which was
       based on the productive combination of standardised mass production and expansive
       mass consumption (Aglietta, 2015). However, by the end of the 1960s, mass production
       and mass consumption in the Western world were already becoming decoupled. The
       markets for standardised, mass-produced goods were showing the first signs of satura-
       tion, as the population’s basic needs had been satisfied (Streeck, 2012: 30). Aside from
       attempts to stimulate demand through public (Streeck, 2014) or private (Crouch, 2009)
       debt, there were responses by capitalist companies to the crisis of mass consumption in
       the form of various product-individualising strategies. By the early 1980s, this process
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      138                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      had already progressed to such an extent in the automotive industry that at Volkswagen’s
      main plant in Wolfsburg, for example, the same car never rolled off the production line
      twice on any given day (Streeck, 2014). This logic also took hold in other industries –
      for example in the textiles sector. The calculation behind it made use of the basic theo-
      rems of consumer sociology, which state that in cases of conspicuous consumption
      (Veblen, 2007 [1899]), a product’s potential for distinction (Bourdieu, 1984) is a central
      motive for its acquisition. The individualisation of production thus aimed to create a
      form of consumption that could no longer be realised in the context of standardised
      mass goods.                                            
        A parallel development was required in the area of consumption: the new opportuni-
      ties for product individualisation had to reach the audience of market citizens.
      Accordingly, there was a massive expansion of marketing and advertising. What is now
      described as the vanguard of digital capitalism in discussions of leading digital compa-
      nies is merely the most current iteration of this principle of an individualisation of con-
      sumption following an individualisation of production (Staab, 2017).
        Nowhere is this more evident than in the two key sources of profit for the commercial
      internet: e-commerce, whose advantage over brick-and-mortar retail primarily consists
      in simplifying access to products and services via personalisation; and online advertis-
      ing, whose promise is to tap into, or even form (behavioural control), individual con-
      sumption preferences. As arenas of singularisation, social media platforms are the crucial
      providers of granular, personalised information and of stimulation of new desires among
      the audience. Their central source of profit is the personalisation of advertising. The fact
      that players such as Google (YouTube), Facebook (including Instagram) or Twitter have
      been able to gradually take market shares from the classic mass media in the TV and
      print sectors is mainly due to their promise to enable a highly individualised approach to
      individual consumers through the creation of user profiles.
        In view of capitalism’s secular crisis of consumption, social media platforms thus
      manifest as machines of consumption rationalisation: they are supposed to point the way
      to ever more individualised production and ever more specific consumer preferences. In
      a materialist reading, the structural function of social media thus seems to be less the
      ‘curation of sociality’ (Dolata, 2021: 109) – it turns out to be more a means of effectively
      individualising consumption, whereby data-behaviourist strategies are confronted with
      singularised demand.                                   
        What initially looks like a form of specialisation in the context of the broad field of
      the advertising industry gains the character of criticality against the backdrop of the
      political economy described above: in times of scarce demand, mediating access to con-
      sumers becomes an essential task. Only those who can generate attention for products –
      or in other words, those who are able to address the audience in its granular uniqueness
      – can hope to sell it. By providing this mediation between supply and demand, social
      media platforms are increasingly performing a market function in the digital sphere.
      Their profit model not only centres on selling advertising space but more comprehen-
      sively on taxing access to the market: what platforms in digital marketplaces (e-com-
      merce) charge in the form of commission is operationalised in social media simply as the
      sale of advertising. In both cases, what is sold is access to consumers, that is, to the
      demand side of markets.                                

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               139     
                                                             
        The design of social media platforms is consistently and unconditionally oriented
       towards this programme. They ultimately form ‘proprietary markets’ (Staab, 2022), are-
       nas of capitalist exchange whose rules are determined by the platform providers. Data
       behaviourist promises of control are used as bait to sell access to singularised demand.
       This structure no longer distinguishes between citizens and consumers or between politi-
       cal public spheres and private worlds of consumption. The public sphere of social media
       is instead a market privatised by the respective platform providers.
       III Digital Structural Change: Commercial Politicisation
       and the Future of Democracy                           
                                                             
       What does this mean for an analysis of the digital public sphere that seeks to update
       Habermas’s approach? Let us first look again at the now expanding panorama of the
       structural transformation of the public sphere: the original bourgeois public sphere was
       set in opposition to the unidirectional, ‘monarchical representation’ of ruling interests,
       which had been rendered outdated by the material conditions of the economy. Bourgeois
       entrepreneurship provided the basis for a class-specific self-consciousness, which was
       articulated, for example, in the practice of literary criticism. In monopoly capitalist
       industrial society, these structures dissolved; in their place came a social polarisation
       according to subjectivised class position. A plebeian public met the bourgeois public and
       conflicts found their expression in print-media battles for public opinion. In the context
       of the Fordist combination of mass production and mass consumption, the political
       threatened to disappear from the realm of public debate, to be replaced by a combination
       of consumerist privatism and mass media entertainment. Habermas famously interpreted
       this last step of structural transformation as the return of monarchical representation
       under conditions of welfare-state capitalism: as refeudalisation.
        Our analysis of social media in the context of the current structural transformation
       shows that the digital constellation represents a distinct fourth phase of this development.
       The difference is not simply a difference in the form of the media in question, and the
       digital structural transformation also triggers something other than a continued retreat
       into the private sphere and consumption. Rather, the change in the accumulation model
       that took place in reaction to the crises of Fordist capitalism led to an individualisation
       of production, which in turn demanded the corresponding individualisation of consump-
       tion, and the identification or production of consumer preferences that are as granular as
       possible. As aggregators of knowledge about these preferences and – at least according
       to the data-behaviourist promise – promotable acts of consumption, as well as gatekeep-
       ers to the audience attention, the platforms have become proprietary markets that trade in
       access to demand for manufacturers. The need for singularisation makes the audience
       susceptible to the constant stimulation of interests, which in turn prompts them to further
       participate in the dynamics of social media. The providers of social media, that is, the
       large social networks, profit from this engagement because each act of user participation
       generates data that can be sold in the form of advertising space.
        As a result of this development, the distinction between the commercial and the politi-
       cal is becoming increasingly irrelevant for understanding both the platforms and the
       singularised audience. On the part of the platforms, both commercial and political
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      140                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      articulation serves to build profiles, that is, the mechanical singularisation of subjects
      that sustains the business model (Reckwitz, 2020). On the part of the subjects, commer-
      cial and political expression ultimately encourage the declaration of their own unique-
      ness. Subjects’ political distinction thus becomes a matter of public concern. As a
      by-product the digital public sphere of social media is thereby to a certain extent politi-
      cised. In the digital constellation, the monarchical representation of late industrial mass
      society is replaced by a politicisation under the primacy of the commercial: privatisation
      without privatism.                                     
        In his 1990 preface to the new German-language edition of Strukturwandel der
      Öffentlichkeit (The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere), Jürgen Habermas
      notes that the strength of his original work lay in its general historical systematics but
      that its normative analysis had been overly influenced by the assumption that the public
      sphere had a determinant effect on democratic self-organisation. This is how Habermas
      justifies his turn towards discourse ethics and democratic proceduralism and the more
      differentiated view of recipient behaviour. With our re-framing of the systematic histori-
      cal contribution, we do not want to claim that it is possible to simply return to the original
      determinism. Rather, it is a matter of understanding the updated account of structural
      transformation in its political effects more precisely and reflecting on the dangers and
      counterforces.                                         
        One way to do this is to highlight the indirect effects of the digital structural transfor-
      mation, that is, to draw conclusions from society that can be applied to politics. This line
      of thinking includes, for example, the fragmentation or polarisation hypothesis already
      presented above and mentioned by Habermas himself, according to which the structuring
      forces of social media limit the societal possibilities for democratic will formation.
      Regardless of the abstract plausibility of these and similar theses, however, they are not
      suitable for understanding how the specific mechanisms of mediality, subjectivation and
      accumulation can be updated in relation to the political system or political action. For
      this purpose, we consider it more useful to chart the land-grabs of the new public spheres
      directly. This is especially evident in relation to ‘data driven elections’ (Bennett and
      Lyon, 2019). This term does not merely capture the fact that politics employs means of
      advertising and targeting (such instrumental appropriation is unsurprising); the develop-
      ment goes deeper: increasingly, a notion of democracy is being articulated in which the
      reading of singularised preferences, rather than the civic expression of opinion through
      active participation, is being interpreted as a democratic principle (Ulbricht, 2020: 431).
      The idea of representation as an active and reciprocal process that is creative and also
      stimulates the political public sphere is therefore withdrawn (Berg et al., 2020). In its
      place comes a conception of democracy that – shaped by the imperatives of the contem-
      porary public sphere and its development – is little more than a struggle for attention,
      influence and data sovereignty. The identification of preferences comes to occupy the
      place once occupied by political contestation and there is an emergence of structural
      power mechanisms that – geared towards the operations of proprietary markets – seek to
      monopolise access to social life: representation without the public sphere.1
      ORCID iD                                               
      Thorsten Thiel https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4261-118X   
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               141     
                                                             
       Note                                                  
       1. In addition to the investigation of direct effects, it would of course also be necessary to con-
         sider what possibilities arise for the recipients of mediatised democracy and how they appro-
         priate the capitalist structures. Our narrow focus on social media and the power of platforms
         has so far excluded this aspect of digital self-organisation from consideration. Of course,
         digital media, with their reciprocal structure, their great reconfigurability and their potential
         to make collective action less dependent on resource-rich actors also offer possibilities that
         allow for a more emancipatory form of development.  
       References                                            
       Aglietta, Michel (2015 [1979]) Theory of Capitalist Regulation: The U.S. Experience. London:
         Verso.                                              
       Bennett, Colin J. and Lyon, David (2019) Data-driven elections: Implications and challenges for
         democratic societies. Internet Policy Review 8(4). DOI: 10.14763/2019.4.1433.
       Bennett, Lance W. and Pfetsch, Barbara (2018) Rethinking political communication in a time of
         disrupted public spheres. Journal of Communication 68(2): 243–253.
       Benson, Rodney (2009) Shaping the public sphere: Habermas and beyond. The American
         Sociologist 40(3): 175–197.                         
       Berg, Sebastian, Rakowski, Niklas and Thiel, Thorsten (2020) The Digital Constellation. Berlin:
         Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society. http://dx.doi.org/10.34669/wi.ws/14
       Bourdieu, Pierre (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard University Press.                           
       Chadwick, Andrew (2013) The Hybrid Media System: Politics and Power. Oxford: Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Crouch, Colin (2009) Privatised Keynesianism: An unacknowledged policy regime. The British
         Journal of Politics & International Relations 11(3): 382–399.
       Dolata, Ulrich (2021) Varieties of internet platforms and their transformative capacity. In: Suter,
         Christian, Cuvi, Jacinto, Balsinger, Philip, and Nedelcu, Mihaela (eds) The Future of Work.
         Zurich: Seismo.                                     
       Elder-Vass, Dave (2016) Profit and Gift in the Digital Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
       Elstub, Stephen, Ercan, Seren, and Mendonça, Ricardo Fabrino (2016) The fourth generation of
         deliberative democracy. Critical Policy Studies 10(2): 139–151.
       Fourcade, Marion and Kluttz, Daniel N. (2020) A Maussian bargain: Accumulation by gift in the
         digital economy. Big Data & Society 7(1): 1–16.     
       Fuchs, Christian (2020) Communication and Capitalism: A Critical Theory. London: University
         of Westminster Press.                               
       Giddens, Anthony (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration.
         Cambridge: Polity.                                  
       Gillespie, Tarleton (2018) Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, Content Moderation, and the
         Hidden Decisions that Shape Social Media. New Haven: Yale University Press.
       Habermas, Jürgen (1976) Legitimation Crisis. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Habermas, Jürgen (1984) The Theory of Communicative Action. Vol. 1: Reason and the
         Rationalization of Society. Boston: Beacon Press.   
       Habermas, Jürgen (1987) The Theory of Communicative Action. Vol. 2: Lifeworld and System.
         Boston: Beacon Press.                               
       Habermas, Jürgen (1991) The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. Cambridge, MA:
         MIT Press.                                          

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      142                             Theory, Culture & Society 39(4)
                                                             
      Habermas, Jürgen (1996) Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law
        and Democracy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.             
      Habermas, Jürgen (2006) Political communication in media society: Does democracy still enjoy an
        epistemic dimension? The impact of normative theory on empirical research. Communication
        Theory 16(4): 411–426.                               
      Habermas, Jürgen (2022) Reflections and hypotheses on a further structural transformation of the
        political public sphere. Theory, Culture & Society 39(4).
      Hindman, Matthew (2018) The Internet Trap: How the Digital Economy Builds Monopolies and
        Undermines Democracy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Hirschman, Albert (1982) Rival interpretations of market society: Civilizing, destructive, or fee-
        ble? Journal of Economic Literature 20(4): 1463–1484.
      Hofmann, Jeanette (2019) Mediated democracy: Linking digital technology to political agency.
        Internet Policy Review 8(2). DOI: 10.14763/2019.2.1416.
      Landemore, Hélène (2020) Open Democracy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
      Mazzucato, Mariana (2013) The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
        Myths. London: Anthem Press.                         
      Pentland, Alex (2015) Social Physics: How Social Networks Can Make Us Smarter. New York:
        Penguin.                                             
      Perez, Carlota (2003) Technological Revolutions and Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles
        and Golden Ages. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.           
      Reckwitz, Andreas (2020) The Society of Singularities. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Rouvroy, Antoinette (2013) The end(s) of critique: Data-behaviourism vs due-process. In:
        Hilderand, Mireille, and De Vries, Katja (eds) Privacy, Due Process and the Computational
        Turn. Milton Park: Routledge.                        
      Shirky, Clay (2008) Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing without Organizations.
        New York: Penguin.                                   
      Srnicek, Nick (2016) Platform Capitalism. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Staab, Philipp (2017) The consumption dilemma of capitalism. Transfer 23(3): 281–294.
      Staab, Philipp (2022) Markets and Power in the Digital Age. Manchester: Manchester University
        Press.                                               
      Stalder, Felix (2018) The Digital Condition. Cambridge: Polity Press.
      Streeck, Wolfgang (2012) Citizens as customers: Considerations on the new politics of consump-
        tion. New Left Review 76: 27–47.                     
      Streeck, Wolfgang (2014) Buying Time: The Delayed Crisis of Democratic Capitalism. London:
        Verso.                                               
      Ulbricht, Lena (2020) Scraping the demos: Digitalization, web scraping and the democratic pro-
        ject. Democratization 27(3): 426–442.                
      Veblen, Thorstein (2007 [1899]) The Theory of the Leisure Class. Oxford: Oxford University
        Press.                                               
      Zuboff, Shoshana (2019) The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
        the New Frontier of Power. New York: Public Affairs. 
      Philipp Staab is Professor of Sociology of the Future of Work at Humboldt University Berlin
      and at the Einstein Center Digital Future. In his research, he combines topics of work, inequality,
      technology and political economy with a particular focus on the digital economy. Currently, he
      is particularly concerned with questions of the political regulation of digital capitalism and the
      connection between digitalisation and sustainability, as well as theory of adaption.

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Staab and Thiel                               143     
                                                             
       Thorsten Thiel is the leader of the research group ‘Democracy and Digitalization’ at the
       Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society and a research fellow at the WZB Berlin Social
       Science Center. In his work he asks how digitalisation reconfigures the interaction between
       citizens and their representatives and how democracies should intervene in the digital transfor-
       mation of the public sphere.                          
       This article is part of the Theory, Culture & Society special issue on ‘A New Structural
       Transformation of the Public Sphere?’, edited by Martin Seeliger and Sebastian
       Sevignani.                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             