[PAGE 1]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:08 Page 213
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
              Apocalypse      Forever?                                  
                                                                        
              Post-political Populism and the Spectre of                
                                                                        
              Climate  Change                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
              Erik Swyngedouw                                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                  Abstract                                              
                  This article interrogates the relationship between two apparently disjointed
                  themes: the consensual presentation and mainstreaming of the global
                  problem of climate change on the one hand and the debate in political
                  theory/philosophy that centers around the emergence and consolidation of
                  a post-political and post-democratic condition on the other. The argument
                  advanced in this article attempts to tease out this apparently paradoxical
                  condition. On the one hand, the climate is seemingly politicized as never
                  before and has been propelled high on the policy agenda. On the other
                  hand, a number of increasingly influential political philosophers insist on
                  how the post-politicization (or de-politicization) of the public sphere (in
                  parallel and intertwined with processes of neoliberalization) have been key
                  markers of the political process over the past few decades. We proceed in
                  four steps. First, we briefly outline the basic contours of the argument and
                  its premises. Second, we explore the ways in which the present climate
                  conundrum is predominantly staged through the mobilization of particular
                  apocalyptic imaginaries. Third, we argue that this specific (re-)presentation
                  of climate change and its associated policies is sustained by decidedly
                  populist gestures. Finally, we discuss how this particular choreographing of
                  climate change is one of the arenas through which a post-political frame
                  and post-democratic political configuration have been mediated.
                  Key words                                             
                  climate change ■environment ■populism ■post-democracy ■post-politics
                                                                        
              ■Theory, Culture & Society2010 (SAGE, Los Angeles, London, New Delhi, and Singapore),
                Vol. 27(2–3): 213–232                                   
                DOI: 10.1177/0263276409358728                           
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 2]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:08 Page 214
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             214 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             Climate Change and the Post-political                      
                A spectre is haunting the entire world: but it is not that of communism....
                Climate change – no more, no less than nature’s payback for what we are
                doing to our precious planet – is day by day now revealing itself. Not only in
                a welter of devastating scientific data and analysis but in the repeated extreme
                weather conditions to which we are all, directly or indirectly, regular
                observers, and, increasingly, victims. (Levene, 2005)   
                The Labour Party’s crowning achievement is the death of politics. There’s
                nothing left to vote for. (Noel Gallagher, rock star, in The Independent,
                11November 2006: 37)                                    
             T                                                          
                HIS ARTICLE interrogates the relationship between two apparently
                disjointed themes: the consensual presentation and mainstreaming of
                the global problem of climate change that presents a clear and present
             danger to civilization as we know it unless urgent and immediate remedial
             action is undertaken on the one hand, and the debate in political
             theory/philosophy that centers around the emergence and consolidation of
             a post-political and post-democratic condition on the other. While the
             former insists on the urgency of politically mediated actions to retrofit the
             global climate to a more benign and stable condition or, at least, on the need
             to engage in interventions that might mitigate some of its more dramatic
             socio-spatial and ecological consequences, the latter argues that the last few
             decades have been characterized by deepening processes of de-politiciza-
             tion characterized by the increasing evacuation of the proper political
             dimension from the public terrain as technocratic management and consen-
             sual policy-making has sutured the spaces of democratic politics.
                We shall proceed in four steps. First, we shall briefly outline the
             basic contours of the argument and its premises. In a second part, we
             explorethewaysinwhichthepresentclimateconundrumispredominantly
             staged through the mobilization of particular apocalyptic imaginaries. In a
             third part, we shall explore how the specific (re)-presentation of climate
             change and its associated policies is sustained by decidedly populist
             gestures. In the final part, we shall argue that this particular choreograph-
             ing of climate change is one of the arenas through which a post-political
             frame and post-democratic political configurations have been mediated.
             Throughout, we maintain that current hegemonic climate change policies
             ultimately re inforce processes of de-politicization and the socio-political
             status quo rather than, as some suggest and hope, offering a wedge that
             might contribute to achieving socio-ecologically more egalitarian transfor-
             mations (Castree, 2009). We shall conclude with an appeal to rethink the
             properly political, to re-establish the horizon of democratic environmental
             politics.                                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 3]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:08 Page 215
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 215 
                                                                        
              The Argument                                              
                  Barbarism or Socialism. (K. Marx)                     
                  Kyoto [Copenhagen] or the Apocalypse. (Green saying)  
                                                                        
              The argument advanced here attempts to interrogate this apparently para-
              doxical condition whereby the climate is politicized as never before while
              a group of increasingly influential political philosophers insist that the post-
              politicization of the public sphere (in parallel and intertwined with
              processes of neoliberalization) have been key markers of the political
              process over the past few decades.                        
                  Over the past decade or so, a widespread consensus has emerged over
              the state of nature and the precarious environmental conditions that may
              lead to the premature end of civilization as we know it (IPCC, 2007). The
              environmental conditions and, in particular, global climate change are
              increasingly staged as signalling a great danger, of epic dimensions, that, if
              unheeded, might radically perturb, if not announce the premature end of
              civilization before its sell-by date has passed. The imminent danger to the
              future of our common human and non-human world calls for radical changes
              in all manner of domains, from the way we produce and organize the trans-
              formation and socio-physical metabolism of nature to routines and cultures
              of consumption (for a standard review, see Giddens, 2009). A fragile consen-
              sus on both the ‘nature’ of the problem and the arrays of managerial and
              institutional technologies to mitigate the most dramatic consequences has
              been reached, despite differences of view, opinion or position (Hulme,
              2009); a consensus that is now largely shared by most political elites from
              a variety of positions, business leaders, activists and the scientific commu-
              nity. The few remaining sceptics are increasingly marginalized as either
              maverick hardliners or conservative bullies.              
                  This elevation of climate change and its consequences onto the terrain
              of public concern and policy has unfolded in parallel to the consolidation
              of a political condition that has evacuated dispute and disagreement from
              the spaces of public encounter to be replaced by a consensually established
              frame that interlocutors like Slavoj Žižek, Jacques Rancière and Chantal
              Mouffe define as post-democratic or post-political (Mouffe, 2005; Rancière,
              2006; Žižek, 1999). This post-political frame is structured around the
              perceived inevitability of capitalism and a market economy as the basic
              organizational structure of the social and economic order, for which there is
              no alternative. The corresponding mode of governmentality is structured
              around dialogical forms of consensus formation, technocratic management
              and problem-focused governance, sustained by populist discursive regimes
              (Swyngedouw,2009).Thepost-politicalsuturingoftheterrainofthepublic
              encounter is, furthermore, institutionally choreographed in the form of
              post-democratic institutional configurations (Crouch, 2004; Marquand,
              2004). I shall begin by accepting the transformation to a post-political and
              post-democratic configuration at face value. What I am concerned with in
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 4]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 216
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             216 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             this article is the historical production of such a post-political and post-
             democratic regime. I contend that the environmental question in general,
             and the climate change argument and how it is publicly staged in particu-
             lar, has been and continues to be one of the markers through which post-
             politicization is wrought. In other words, the particular way in which the
             environmental condition has been elevated to a matter of public concern
             can be mobilized as a way of grappling with the contested formation of a
             post-political frame. The politics of climate change and, more generally, the
             concern with sustainability – I maintain – are not only expressive of such
             post-political and post-democratic organization, but have been among the
             key arenas through which the post-political frame is forged, configured and
             entrenched. This process of de-politicization – or the colonization of the
             political by politics/the police – which operates through elevating the state
             of nature onto the public terrain in thoroughly depoliticized ways calls for
             a reconsideration of what the political is, where it is located and how the
             democratic political can be recaptured.                    
             The Desire for the Apocalypse and the Fetishization of CO  
                                                    2                   
                It is easier to imagine the end of the world than to imagine the end of
                capitalism. (Jameson, 2003: 73)                         
             We shall start from the attractions of the apocalyptic imaginaries that infuse
             the climate change debate and through which much of the public concern
             with the climate change argument is sustained. The distinct millennialist
             discourse around the climate has co-produced a widespread consensus that
             the earth and many of its component parts are in an ecological bind that
             may short-circuit human and non-human life in the not too distant future if
             urgent and immediate action to retrofit nature to a more benign equilibrium
             is postponed for much longer. Irrespective of the particular views of Nature
             held by different individuals and social groups, consensus has emerged over
             the seriousness of the environmental condition and the precariousness of
             our socio-ecological balance (Swyngedouw, forthcoming). BP has re-
             branded itself as ‘Beyond Petroleum’ to certify its environmental creden-
             tials, Shell plays a more eco-sensitive tune, eco-activists of various political
             or ideological stripes and colours engage in direct action in the name of
             saving the planet, New Age post-materialists join the chorus that laments
             the irreversible decline of ecological amenities, eminent scientists enter the
             public domain to warn of pending ecological catastrophe, politicians try to
             outmanoeuvre each other in brandishing the ecological banner, and a wide
             range of policy initiatives and practices, performed under the motif of
             ‘sustainability’, are discussed, conceived and implemented at all geograph-
             ical scales. Al Gore’s evangelical film An Inconvenient Truth won him the
             Nobel Peace price, surely one of the most telling illustrations of how eco -
             logical matters are elevated to the terrain of a global humanitarian cause
             (see also Giddens, 2009). While there is certainly no agreement on what
             exactly Nature is and how to relate to it, there is a virtually unchallenged
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 5]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 217
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 217 
                                                                        
              consensus over the need to be more ‘environmentally’ sustainable if disaster
              is to be avoided; a climatic sustainability that centres around stabilizing the
              CO content in the atmosphere (Boykoff et al., forthcoming).
                2                                                       
                  This consensual framing is itself sustained by a particular scientific
              discourse.1 The complex translation and articulation between what Bruno
              Latour (2004) would call matters of fact versus matters of concern has been
              thoroughly short-circuited. The changing atmospheric composition, marked
              by increasing levels of CO and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
                              2                                         
              is largely caused by anthropogenic activity, primarily (although not exclu-
              sively) as a result of the burning of fossilized or captured CO (in the form
                                                   2                    
              of oil, gas, coal, wood) and the disappearance of CO sinks and their
                                                2                       
              associated capture processes (through deforestation for example). These
              undisputed matters of fact are, without proper political intermediation,
              translated into matters of concern. The latter, of course, are eminently polit-
              ical in nature. Yet, in the climate change debate, the political nature of
              matters of concern is disavowed to the extent that the facts in themselves
              are elevated, through a short-circuiting procedure, on to the terrain of the
              political, where climate change is framed as a global humanitarian cause.
              The matters of concern are thereby relegated to a terrain beyond dispute,
              to one that does not permit dissensus or disagreement. Scientific expertise
              becomes the foundation and guarantee for properly constituted politics/
              policies.                                                 
                  In this consensual setting, environmental problems are generally
              staged as universally threatening to the survival of humankind, announcing
              the premature termination of civilization as we know it and sustained by
              what Mike Davis (1999) aptly called ‘ecologies of fear’. The discursive
              matrix through which the contemporary meaning of the environmental
              condition is woven is one quilted systematically by the continuous invoca-
              tion of fear and danger, the spectre of ecological annihilation or at least
              seriously distressed socio-ecological conditions for many people in the near
              future. ‘Fear’ is indeed the crucial node through which much of the current
              environmental narrative is woven, and continues to feed the concern with
              ‘sustainability’. This cultivation of ‘ecologies of fear’, in turn, is sustained
              in part by a particular set of phantasmagorical imaginaries (Katz, 1995).
              The apocalyptic imaginary of a world without water, or at least with endemic
              water shortages, ravaged by hurricanes whose intensity is amplified by
              climate change; pictures of scorched land as global warming shifts the geo-
              pluvial regime and the spatial variability of droughts and floods; icebergs
              that disintegrate around the poles as ice melts into the sea, causing the sea
              level to rise; alarming reductions in biodiversity as species disappear or are
              threatened by extinction; post-apocalyptic images of waste lands reminis-
              cent of the silent ecologies of the region around Chernobyl; the threat of
              peak-oil that, without proper management and technologically innovative
              foresight, would return society to a Stone Age existence; the devastation of
              wildfires, tsunamis, diseases like SARS, avian flu, Ebola or HIV, all these
              imaginaries of a Nature out of synch, destabilized, threatening and out of

[PAGE 6]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 218
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             218 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             control are paralleled by equally disturbing images of a society that contin-
             ues piling up waste, pumping CO into the atmosphere, deforesting the
                                  2                                     
             earth, etc. This is a process that Neil Smith appropriately refers to as
             ‘nature-washing’ (2008: 245). In sum, our ecological predicament is sutured
             by millennial fears, sustained by an apocalyptic rhetoric and representa-
             tional tactics, and by a series of performative gestures signalling an over-
             whelming, mind-boggling danger, one that threatens to undermine the very
             coordinates of our everyday lives and routines, and may shake up the
             foundations of all we took and take for granted. Table 1 exemplifies some
             of the imaginaries that are continuously invoked.          
                Of course, apocalyptic imaginaries have been around for a long time
             as an integral part of Western thought, first of Christianity and later emerging
             as the underbelly of fast-forwarding technological modernization and its
             associated doomsday thinkers. However, present-day millennialism
             preaches an apocalypse without the promise of redemption. Saint John’s
             biblical apocalypse, for example, found its redemption in God’s infinite love.
             The proliferation of modern apocalyptic imaginaries also held up the
             promise of redemption: the horsemen of the apocalypse, whether riding
             under the name of the proletariat, technology or capitalism, could be tamed
             with appropriate political and social revolutions.         
                As Martin Jay argued, while traditional apocalyptic versions still held
             out the hope for redemption, for a ‘second coming’, for the promise of a ‘new
             dawn’, environmental apocalyptic imaginaries are ‘leaving behind any hope
             of rebirth or renewal ... in favour of an unquenchable fascination with being
             on the verge of an end that never comes’ (1994: 33). The emergence of new
             Table 1 Apocalyptic attractors                             
             Global warming and ozone loss: Apocalypse soon             
             Sea levels likely to rise much faster than was predicted   
             Global warming is causing the Greenland ice cap to disintegrate far faster than
              anyone predicted                                          
             Global warming ‘30 times quicker than it used to be’       
             Climate change: On the edge                                
             (all quotes from The Independent, 17 February 2006)        
             WATER WARS                                                 
             (The Independent, 28 February 2006)                        
             The Four Horsemen of Industrial Society: War, Over-population, Climate Change
             and Peak Oil (published on 12 Jan. 2006 by Energy Bulletin)
             Pentagon warns Bush of apocalyptic climate change by 2020  
             (The Observer, 22 February 2004)                           
             We have less than 100 months to act.                       
             (Prince Charles, March 2009)                               
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 7]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 219
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 219 
                                                                        
              forms of millennialism around the environmental nexus is of a particular
              kind that promises neither redemption nor realization. As Klaus Scherpe
              (1987) insists, this is not simply apocalypse now, but apocalypse forever. It
              is a vision that does not suggest, prefigure or expect the necessity of an event
              that will alter history. Derrida (referring to the nuclear threat in the 1980s)
              sums this up most succinctly:                             
                  ... here, precisely, is announced – as promise or as threat – an apocalypse
                  without apocalypse, an apocalypse without vision, without truth, without
                  revelation ... without message and without destination, without sender and
                  without decidable addressee ... an apocalypse beyond good and evil.
                  (1992:66)                                             
                                                                        
              The environmentally apocalyptic future, forever postponed, neither
              promises redemption nor does it possess a name; it is pure negativity.
                  The attractions of such an apocalyptic imaginary are related to a
              series of characteristics. In contrast to standard left arguments about the
              apocalyptic dynamics of unbridled capitalism (Mike Davis is a great
              exemplar of this; see Davis, 1999, 2002), I would argue that sustaining
              and nurturing apocalyptic imaginaries is an integral and vital part of the
              new cultural politics of capitalism (Boltanski and Chiapello, 2007) for
              which the management of fear is a central leitmotif (Badiou, 2007). At the
              symbolic level, apocalyptic imaginaries are extraordinarily powerful in
              disavowing or displacing social conflict and antagonisms. As such, apoca-
              lyptic imaginations are decidedly populist and foreclose a proper political
              framing. Or, in other words, the presentation of climate change as a global
              humanitarian cause produces a thoroughly depoliticized imaginary, one
              thatdoesnotrevolvearoundchoosingonetrajectoryratherthananother,one
              that is not articulated with specific political programs or socio-ecological
              project or revolutions. It is this sort of mobilization without political issue
              that led Alain Badiou to state that ‘ecology is the new opium for the
              masses’, whereby the nurturing of the promise of a more benign retrofitted
              climate exhausts the horizon of our aspirations and imaginations (Badiou,
              2008; Žižek, 2008). We have to make sure that radical techno-managerial
              and socio-cultural transformations, organized within the horizons of a
              capitalistorderthatisbeyonddispute,areinitiatedthatretrofittheclimate
              (Swyngedouw, forthcoming). In other words, we have to change radically,
              but within the contours of the existing state of the situation – ‘the parti-
              tion of the sensible’ in Rancière’s (1998) words, so that nothing really has
              to change.                                                
                  The negative desire for an apocalypse that few really believe will
              realize itself (if we were to believe that the earth is really in the dismal state
              we are told it is in, we would not be sitting around writing and reading arcane
              academic journal articles) finds its positive injunction around a fetishist
              invocation of CO as the ‘thing’ around which our environmental dreams,
                         2                                              
              aspirations, contestations as well as policies crystallize. The ‘point de
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 8]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 220
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             220 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             capiton’, the quilting point through which the signifying chain that weaves
             a discursive matrix of meaning and content for the climate change problem-
             atic, is CO , the objet petit athat simultaneously expresses our deepest fears
                   2                                                    
             and around which the desire for change, for a better socio-climatic world is
             expressed (see Stavrakakis, 1997, 2000; Swyngedouw, forthcoming).
                The fetishist disavowal of the multiple and complex relations through
             which environmental changes unfold finds its completion in the double
             reductionism to this singular socio-chemical component (CO ). The reifi-
                                                  2                     
             cation of complex processes to a thing-like object-cause in the form of a
             socio-chemical compound around which our environmental desires crys-
             tallize is furthermore inscribed with a particular social meaning and
             function through its enrolment as commodity in the processes of capital
             circulation and market exchange (Bumpus and Liverman, 2008; Liverman,
             2009). The commodification of CO – primarily via the Kyoto Protocol and
                                 2                                      
             various offsetting schemes – in turn, has triggered a rapidly growing deriv-
             atives market of futures and options. On the European climate exchange,
             for example, trade in CO futures and options grew from zero in 2005 to
                            2                                           
             463 million tons in June 2009, with prices fluctuating from over 30 euro
             to less than 10 euro per ton over this time period.2 The extraordinary
             complexity of state and regulatory procedures forcing the commodification
             of CO exemplifies par excellence what Marx once defined as commodity
                2                                                       
             fetishism:                                                 
                A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily under-
                stood. Its analysis shows that it is, in reality, a very queer thing, abounding
                in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties. (2004 [1867]: 163)
             CO ’s functioning as a commodity (and financialized asset) is dependent on
               2                                                        
             its insertion in a complex governance regime organized around a set of
             technologies of governance that revolve around reflexive risk-calculation,
             self-assessment, interest-negotiation and intermediation, accountancy rules
             and accountancy-based disciplining, detailed quantification and bench-
             marking of performance (Dean, 1999). The latter is politically choreo-
             graphed and instituted by the Kyoto Protocol and related, through
             extraordinarily complex, institutional configurations, that is, the techno-
             managerial machinery of post-democratic governing.         
                The above potted summary of the uses of apocalyptic imaginaries,
             the science–politics short-circuiting and the privatization of the climate
             through the commodification of CO is strictly parallel, I contend, with the
                                  2                                     
             deepening consolidation of a political populism that characterizes the
             present post-political condition (Žižek, 2006a). And that is what we shall
             turn to next.                                              
                                                                        

[PAGE 9]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 221
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 221 
                                                                        
              Succumbing to the Populist Temptation                     
                  If we do nothing, the consequences for every person on this earth will be
                  severe and unprecedented – with vast numbers of environmental refugees,
                  social instability and decimated economies: far worse than anything which
                  we are seeing today. (Prince Charles, March 2009)3    
              Environmental politics and debates over ‘sustainable’ futures in the face of
              pending environmental catastrophe signal a range of populist maneuvers
              that infuse the post-political post-democratic condition. In this part, we shall
              chart the characteristics of populism (see, among others, Canovan, 1999;
              2005; Laclau, 2005; Mudde, 2004; Žižek, 2006a) as they are expressed in
              mainstream climate concerns. In other words, to the extent that consensual
              climate change imaginaries, arguments and policies reflect processes of de-
              politicization, the former are sustained by a series of decidedly populist
              gestures. Here, I shall summarize the particular ways in which climate
              change expresses some of the classic tenets of populism.  
                  First, the climate change conundrum is not only portrayed as global,
              but is constituted as a universal humanitarian threat. We are all potential
              victims. ‘THE’ Environment and ‘THE’ People, Humanity as a whole in a
              material and philosophical manner, are invoked and called into being.
              Humanity (as well as large parts of the non-human world) is under threat
              from climatic catastrophes. However, the ‘people’ here are not constituted
              as heterogeneous political subjects, but as universal victims, suffering from
              processes beyond their control. As such, populism cuts across the idiosyn-
              crasies of different, heterogeneously constituted, differentially acting, and
              often antagonistic human and non-human ‘natures’; it silences ideo logical
              and other constitutive social differences and disavows conflicts of interests
              by distilling a common threat or challenge to both Nature and Humanity.
              As Žižek puts it:                                         
                  ...populism occurs when a series of particular ‘democratic’ demands [in this
                  case, a good environment, a retro-fitted climate, a series of socio-environmen-
                  tally mitigating actions] is enchained in a series of equivalences, and this
                  enchainment produces ‘people’ as the universal political subject ... and all
                  different particular struggles and antagonisms appear as part of a global
                  antagonistic struggle between ‘us’ (people) and ‘them’ [in this case ‘it’, i.e.
                  CO ]. (Žižek, 2006a: 553)                             
                   2                                                    
                  Second, this universalizing claim of the pending catastrophe is socially
              homogenizing. Although geographical and social differences in terms of
              effects are clearly recognized and detailed, these differences are generally
              mobilized to further reinforce the global threat that faces the whole of
              humankind (see Hulme, 2008). It is this sort of argumentation that led the
              latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to
              infer that the poor will be hit first and hardest by climate change (IPCC,
              2009), which is of course a correct assertion – the poor are by definition ill-
              equipped to deal with any sort of change beyond their control – but the
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 10]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 222
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             222 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             report continues that, therefore, in the name of the poor, climate change has
             to be tackled urgently.                                    
                A third characteristic of environmental apocalyptic thought is that it
             reinforces the nature–society dichotomy and the causal power of nature to
             derail civilizations. It is this process that Neil Smith refers to as ‘nature-
             washing’:                                                  
                Nature-washing is a process by which social transformations of nature are
                well enough acknowledged, but in which that socially changed nature
                becomes a new super determinant of our social fate. It might well be society’s
                fault for changing nature, but it is the consequent power of that nature that
                brings on the apocalypse. The causal power of nature is not compromised but
                would seem to be augmented by social injections into that nature. (2008: 245)
             While the part-anthropogenic process of the accumulation of greenhouse
             gases in the atmosphere is readily acknowledged, the related ecological
             problems are externalized as are the solutions. CO becomes the fethishized
                                          2                             
             stand-in for the totality of climate change calamities and, therefore, it
             suffices to reverse atmospheric CO build-up to a negotiated idealized point
                                 2                                      
             in history, to return to climatic status quo ex-ante. An extraordinary techno-
             managerial apparatus is under way, ranging from new eco-technologies of a
             variety of kinds to unruly complex managerial and institutional configura-
             tions, with a view to producing a socio-ecological fix to make sure nothing
             really changes. Stabilizing the climate seems to be a condition for capital-
             ist life as we know it to continue. Moreover, the mobilized mechanisms to
             arrive at this allegedly more benign (past) condition are actually those that
             produced the problem in the first place (commodification of nature – in this
             case CO ), thereby radically disavowing the social relations and processes
                  2                                                     
             through which this hybrid socio-natural quasi-object (Latour, 1993;
             Swyngedouw, 2006) came into its problematic being. Populist discourse
             ‘displaces social antagonism and constructs the enemy. In populism, the
             enemy is externalized or reified into a positive ontological entity [excessive
             CO ] (even if this entity is spectral) whose annihilation would restore
               2                                                        
             balance and justice’ (Žižek, 2006a: 555). The enemy is always externalized
             and objectified. Populism’s fundamental fantasy, for Žižek, is that of ‘intrud-
             ers’ who have corruptedthe system. CO stands here as the classic example
                                    2                                   
             of a fetishized and externalized foe that requires dealing with if sustainable
             climate futures are to be attained. Problems therefore are not the result of
             the ‘system’, of unevenly distributed power relations, of the networks of
             control and influence, of rampant injustices, or of a fatal flaw inscribed in
             the system, but are blamed on an outsider (Žižek, 2006a: 555). That is why
             the solution can be found in dealing with the ‘pathological’ phenomenon,
             the resolution for which resides in the system itself. It is not the system that
             is the problem, but its pathological syndrome (for which the cure is internal),
             that is posited as ‘excess’. While CO is externalized as the socio-climatic
                                   2                                    
             enemy, a potential cure in the guise of the Kyoto principles is generated

[PAGE 11]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 223
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 223 
                                                                        
              from within the market functioning of the system itself. The ‘enemy’ is,
              therefore, always vague, ambiguous, socially empty or vacuous (like ‘CO ’);
                                                         2              
              the ‘enemy’ is a mere thing, not socially embodied, named and counted.
              While a proper analysis and politics would endorse the view that CO -
                                                          2             
              as-crisis stands as the pathological symptom of the normal, one that
              expresses the excesses inscribed in the very normal functioning of the
              system (i.e. capitalism), the policy architecture around climate change
              insists that this ‘excessive’ state is not inscribed in the functioning of the
              system itself, but is an aberration that can be ‘cured’ by mobilizing the very
              inner dynamics and logic of the system (privatization of CO , commodifica-
                                                  2                     
              tion and market exchange via carbon and carbon-offset trading).
                  Fourth, populism is based on a politics of ‘the people know best’
              (although the latter category remains often empty, unnamed), supported by
              a scientific technocracy assumed to be neutral, and advocates a direct
              relationship between people and political participation. It is assumed that
              this will lead to a good, if not optimal, solution, a view strangely at odds
              with the presumed radical openness, uncertainty and undecidability of the
              excessive risks associated with Beck’s or Giddens’ second modernity. The
              architecture of populist governing takes the form of stakeholder partici-
              pation or forms of participatory governance that operates beyond the state
              and permits a form of self-management, self-organization and controlled
              self-disciplining (see Dean, 1999; Lemke, 1999), under the aegis of a
              non-disputed liberal-capitalist order.                    
                  Fifth, populist tactics do not identify a privileged subject of change
              (like the proletariat for Marxists, women for feminists or the ‘creative class’
              for competitive capitalism), but instead invoke a common condition or
              predicament, the need for common humanity-wide action, mutual collabo-
              ration and cooperation. There are no internal social tensions or internal
              generative conflicts; the ‘people’, in this case global humanity, are called
              into being as political subject, thereby disavowing the radical heterogene-
              ity and antagonisms that cut through ‘the people’. It is exactly this consti-
              tutive split of the people, the recognition of radically differentiated if not
              opposed social, political or ecological desires, that calls the proper
              democratic political into being.                          
                  Sixth, populist demands are always addressed to the elites. Populism
              as a project addresses demands to the ruling elites (getting rid of immi-
              grants, saving the climate...); it is not about replacing the elites, but calling
              on the elites to undertake action. The ecological problem is no exception.
              It does not invite a transformation of the existing socio-ecological order but
              calls on the elites to undertake action such that nothing really has to change,
              so that life can basically go on as before. In this sense, environmental
              populism is inherently reactionary, a key ideological support structure for
              securing the socio-political status quo. It is inherently non-political and
              non-partisan. A Gramscian ‘passive revolution’ has taken place over the past
              few years, whereby the elites have not only acknowledged the climate
              conundrum and, thereby, answered the call of the ‘people’ to take the climate

[PAGE 12]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 224
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             224 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             seriously, but are moving rapidly to convince the world that, indeed, capi-
             talism can not only solve the climate riddle but also that capitalism can
             make a new climate by unmaking the one it has co-produced over the past
             few hundred years through a series of extraordinary techno-natural and eco-
             managerial fixes. Not only do the elites take these particular demands of the
             people seriously, it also mobilizes them in ways that serve their purposes.
                Seventh, no proper names are assigned to a post-political populist
             politics (Badiou, 2005). Post-political populism is associated with a politics
             of not naming, in the sense of giving a definite or proper name to its domain
             or field of action. Only ‘empty’ signifiers like ‘climate change policy’, ‘bio -
             diversity policy’ or a vacuous ‘sustainable policy’ replace the proper names
             of politics. These proper names, according to Rancière (1998; see also
             Badiou, 2005), are what constitute a genuine democracy, that is, a space
             where the unnamed, the uncounted and, consequently, unsymbolized
             become named and counted. Consider, for example, how class struggle in
             the 19th and 20th century was exactly about naming the proletariat, its
             counting, symbolization, narration and consequent entry into the techno-
             machinery of the state. In the 20th century, feminist politics became named
             through the narration, activism and symbolization of ‘woman’ as a political
             category. And, for capitalism, the ‘creative class’ is the revolutionary subject
             that sustains its creatively destructive transformations. Climate change has
             no positively embodied name or signifier; it does not call a political subject
             into being that stands in for the universality of egalitarian democratic
             demands. In other words, the future of a globally warmer world has no proper
             name. In contrast to other signifiers that signal a positively embodied
             content with respect to the future (like socialism, communism, liberalism),
             an ecologically and climatologically different future world is only captured
             in its negativity; a pure negativity without promises of redemption, without
             a positive injunction that ‘transcends’/sublimates negativity and without
             proper subject. The realization of this apocalyptic promise is forever post-
             poned, the never-land of tomorrow’s unfulfilled and unfulfillable promises.
             Yet the gaze on tomorrow permits recasting social, political and other
             pressing issues today as future conditions that can be retroactively re-
             scripted as a techno-managerial issue.                     
                The final characteristic of populism takes this absence of a positively
             embodied signifier further. As particular demands are expressed (get rid of
             immigrants, reduce CO ) that remain particular, populism forecloses univer-
                          2                                             
             salization as a positive socio-environmental injunction or project. In other
             words, the environmental problem does not posit a positive and named
             socio-environmental situation, an embodied vision, a desire that awaits
             realization, a fiction to be realized. In that sense, populism does not solve
             problems, it moves them elsewhere. Consider, for example, the current
             argument over how the nuclear option is again portrayed as a possible and
             realistic option to secure a sustainable energy future and as an alternative
             to deal both with CO emissions and peak-oil. The redemption of our CO
                         2                               2              
             quagmire is found in replacing the socio-ecologically excessive presence of

[PAGE 13]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 225
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 225 
                                                                        
              CO  with another socio-natural object, U235/238, and the inevitable
                2                                                       
              production of all manner of socio-natural transuranic elements. The nuclear
              ‘fix’ is now increasingly staged (and will undoubtedly be implemented) as
              one of the possible remedies to save both climate and capital. It hardly
              arouses expectations for a better and ecologically sound society.
                  We are now in a position to situate this argument within the broader
              debate about the changing nature of politics, particularly in the global
              North, the tactics and processes of de-politicization, and the emergence of
              a post-political and post-democratic frame. This is what we shall turn to
              next.                                                     
              The Post-political and Post-democratic Condition          
                  ‘Well, my dear Adeimantus, what is the nature of tyranny? It’s obvious, I
                  suppose, that it arises out of democracy.’ (Plato, 2003)
              Consensually established concerns, like climate change, structured around
              ecologies of fear and sustained by a universalizing populist discourse
              express and sustain the deepening of a post-political condition. The latter
              is, in turn, institutionalized through forms of post-democratic governing.
              Post-politics is marked by the predominance of a managerial logic in all
              aspects of life, the reduction of the political to administration where
              decision-making is increasingly considered to be a question of expert knowl-
              edge and not of political position. It is accompanied by the diffusion of
              governance into a host of non-state or quasi-state institutional forms and
              actors, and fosters consensual understandings of political action and the
              particularization of political demands.                   
                  Post-politics refers to a politics in which ideological or dissensual
              contestation and struggles are replaced by techno-managerial planning,
              expert management and administration, ‘whereby the regulation of the
              security and welfare of human lives is the primary goal’ (Žižek, 2008).
              Whereas the proper democratic political recognizes the constitutive split of
              the people, the inherent antagonisms and heterogeneities that cut through
              the social, while presuming the equality of each and everyone qua speaking
              beings, the post-political disavows these antagonisms by displacing conflict
              and disagreement on to the terrain of consensually manageable problems,
              expert knowledge and interest intermediation (Swyngedouw, 2009a). ‘Doing
              politics’ is reduced to a form of institutionalized social management and to
              the mobilization of governmental technologies, where difficulties and
              problems are dealt with by administrative and techno-organizational means
              (Nancy, cited in Marchart, 2007: 68). In other words, politics as policy-
              making (la politique or politics/police) has sutured the space of the politi-
              cal as expressions of disagreement/dissensus (le politique or the political)
              (Dikeç, 2005). Such a post-political arrangement signals a de-politicized (in
              the sense of the disappearance of the democratic agonistic struggle over the
              content and direction of socio-ecological life) public space where adminis-
              trative governance defines the zero-level of politics (see Marquand, 2004;
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 14]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 226
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             226 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             Swyngedouw, 2009b). Proper political choice as the agonistic confrontation
             of competing visions of a different socio-ecological order is foreclosed as
             the space of the political, or sutured by totalizing threats that permit only
             one choice or direction, one that can be ‘managed’ through dialogical
             consensual practices (Mouffe, 2005).                       
                Post-politics rejects ideological divisions and the explicit universal-
             ization of particular political demands (Žižek, 1999: 198). Post-politics is
             thus about the administration (policing) of social, economic, ecological or
             other issues, and it remains, of course, fully within the realm of the possible,
             of existing social relations, which are ‘the partition of the sensible’
             (Rancière, 2001). ‘The ultimate sign of post-politics in all Western coun-
             tries’, Žižek (2002: 303) argues, ‘is the growth of a managerial approach to
             government: government is reconceived as a managerial function, deprived
             of its proper political dimension.’                        
                In post-politics, the conflict of global ideological visions embodied in
                different parties which compete for power is replaced by the collaboration of
                enlightened technocrats (economists, public opinion specialists ...) and
                liberal multiculturalists; via the process of negotiation of interests, a compro-
                mise is reached in the guise of a more or less universal consensus. Post-
                politics thus emphasizes the need to leave old ideological visions behind and
                confront new issues, armed with the necessary expert knowledge and free
                deliberation that takes people’s concrete needs and demands into account.
                (Žižek, 1999: 198)                                      
                The political (the space of litigation in which the excluded can protest the
                wrong/injustice done to them) [is] foreclosed.... It is crucial to perceive ...
                the post-political suspension of the political in the reduction of the state to
                a mere police agent servicing the (consensually established) needs of
                market forces and multiculturalist tolerant humanitarianism. (Žižek,
                1998:997)                                               
             Post-politics refuses politicization in the classical Greek sense, that is, as
             the metaphorical universalization of particular demands, which aims at
             ‘more’ than the negotiation of interests. Politics becomes something one can
             do without making decisions that divide and separate (Thomson, 2003).
             Difficulties and problems, which are generally staged and accepted as
             problematic, have to be dealt with by means of compromise and the produc-
             tion of consensus. The key feature of consensus is ‘the annulment of
             dissensus ... the “end of politics”’ (Rancière, 2001: §32). Of course, this
             post- political world eludes choice and freedom (other than those tolerated
             by the consensus) and effaces the properly political from the spaces of
             public encounter. For Rancière (1998), this disavowal of the political and
             the staging of politics as a form of consensual management of the givens
             of the situation is one of the tactics through which spaces of conflict and
             antagonism are smoothed over and displaced.                
                This ‘retreat of the political’ (Lacoue-Labarthe and Nancy, 1997) and
             its replacement by consensual policing arrangements is organized through
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 15]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 227
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 227 
                                                                        
              post-democratic institutions of governance, like the Kyoto Protocol and
              other public–private bodies that increasingly replace the political institu-
              tions of government (see Crouch, 2004). Post-democratic institutional
              arrangements are the performative expression of a post-political condition.
              For Rancière (1998: 102): ‘Postdemocracy is ... a democracy that has
              eliminated the appearance, the miscount, and dispute of the people and is
              thereby reducible to the sole interplay of state mechanisms and combina-
              tions of social energies and interests.’ Urbaniti defines these post-
              democratic institutions of ‘governance-beyond-the-state’ as follows:
                  Governance entails an explicit reference to ‘mechanisms’ or ‘organized’ and
                  ‘coordinated activities’ appropriate to the solution of some specific problems.
                  Unlike government, governance refers to ‘policies’ rather than ‘politics’....
                  Its recipients are not ‘the people’ as collective political subject, but ‘the
                  population’ that can be affected by global issues such as the environment,
                  migration, or the use of natural resources. (Urbinati, 2003: 80)
              This post-democratic constitution reconfigures the act of governing to a
              stakeholder-based arrangement of multi-scalar governance in which the
              traditional state operates institutionally together with experts, NGOs and
              other ‘responsible’ partners (while ‘irresponsible’ partners are excluded).
              They operate with a generally accepted consensus of a global and largely
              (neo)liberal capitalism, the right of individual choice, an eco logical aware-
              ness and the necessity to continue this, to sustain the state of the situation.
              Discussion and dispute are tolerated, even encouraged, in so far as the
              general frame is not contested.                           
                  Not only are radical dissent, critique and fundamental conflict being
              evacuated from the political arena (and relegated to the terrain of ‘extra-
              political’ and unauthorized violence), but also the parameters of democratic
              governing itself are being shifted, announcing new forms of governmental-
              ity, in which traditional disciplinary society is transfigured into a society of
              control through democratically disembedded networks (like ‘the Kyoto
              Protocol’; ‘the Dublin Statement’, the ‘Rio Summit’, etc....).
              Conclusion: Re-thinking the Political Environment         
                  Against thoughts of the end and catastrophe, I believe it is possible and
                  necessary to oppose a thought of political precariousness. (Rancière,
                  2004:8)                                               
              We have argued that the particular framing of climate change and its
              associated populist politics as outlined above forecloses (or at least attempts
              to do so) politicization and evacuates dissent through the formation of a
              particular regime of environmental governance that revolves around consen-
              sus, agreement, participatory negotiation of different interests and techno-
              cratic expert management in the context of a non-disputed management of
              market-based socio-economic organization. Even a cursory analysis of
              ‘green politics’, whether from the perspective of environmental movements
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 16]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 228
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             228 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             (like Greenpeace) or environmental parties (the German Greens are a classic
             case), over the past few decades would signal their rapid transformation from
             engaging in a politics of contestation, organized action, radical disagree-
             ment and developing visionary alternatives to their integration into stake-
             holder-based negotiation arrangements aimed at delivering a negotiated
             policy.                                                    
                A consensual post-politics emerges here, one that either eliminates
             fundamental conflict or elevates it to antithetical ultra-politics. The consen-
             sual times we are currently living in have thus eliminated a genuine polit-
             ical space of disagreement. These post-political climate change policies rest
             on the following foundations. First, the social and ecological problems
             caused by modernity/capitalism are external side-effects; they are not an
             inherent and integral part of the relations of liberal politics and capitalist
             economies. Second, a strictly populist politics emerges here; one that
             elevates the interest of an imaginary ‘the People’, Nature, or ‘the environ-
             ment’ to the level of the universal, rather than opening spaces that permit
             the universalization of the claims of particular socio-natures, environments,
             or social groups or classes. Third, these side-effects are constituted as
             global, universal and threatening. Fourth, the ‘enemy’ or the target of
             concern is continuously externalized and becomes socially disembodied, is
             always vague, ambiguous, unnamed and uncounted, and ultimately empty.
             Fifth, the target of concern can be managed through a consensual dia logical
             politics whereby demands become depoliticized and politics naturalized
             within a given socio-ecological order for which there is ostensibly no real
             alternative (Swyngedouw, 2007).                            
                The post-political environmental consensus, therefore, is one that is
             radically reactionary, one that forestalls the articulation of divergent,
             conflicting and alternative trajectories of future socio-environmental possi-
             bilities and of human–human and human–nature articulations and assem-
             blages. It holds on to a harmonious view of Nature that can be recaptured
             while reproducing, if not solidifying, a liberal-capitalist order for which
             there seems to be no alternative. Much of the sustainability argument has
             evacuated the politics of the possible, the radical contestation of alternative
             future socio-environmental possibilities and socio-natural arrangements,
             and has silenced the antagonisms and conflicts that are constitutive of our
             socio-natural orders by externalizing conflict. It is inherently reactionary.
             As Badiou (2005) argues, ‘proper’ politics must revolve around the construc-
             tion of great new fictions that create real possibilities for constructing
             different socio-environmental futures. To the extent that the current post-
             political condition that combines apocalyptic environmental visions with a
             hegemonic neoliberal view of social ordering constitutes one particular
             fiction (one that in fact forecloses dissent, conflict and the possibility of a
             different future), there is an urgent need for different stories and fictions
             that can be mobilized for realization (Brand et al., 2009). This requires fore-
             grounding and naming different socio-environmental futures and recogniz-
             ing conflict, difference and struggle over the naming and trajectories of these
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 17]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 229
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 229 
                                                                        
              futures. Socio-environmental conflict, therefore, should not be subsumed
              under the homogenizing mantle of a populist environmentalist-sustainabil-
              ity discourse, but should be legitimized as constitutive of a democratic order.
              This, of course, turns the climate question into a question of democracy and
              its meaning. It asserts the horizon of a recuperated democracy as the terrain
              (space) for expressing conflict, for nurturing agonistic debate and disagree-
              ment, and, most importantly, for the naming of different possible socio-
              environmental futures.                                    
              Notes                                                     
              1. Of course, the politics of climate science itself should not be ignored, but this
              is beyond the scope of the present article. For a discussion of the politics of climate
              science, see Demeritt (2001).                             
              2. See URL (consulted July 2009): www.ecx.eu              
              3. Speech by HRH the Prince of Wales at La Moneda Palace, Santiago, Chile,
              9 March 2009; URL (consulted January 2010): http://www.princeofwales.gov.uk/
              speechesandarticles/a_speech_by_hrh_the_prince_of_wales_at_la_moneda_palace_
              sant_1398538628.html                                      
              References                                                
              Badiou, A. (2005) ‘Politics: A Non-expressive Dialectics’, paper given at ‘Is the
              Politics of Truth still Thinkable?’, a conference organized by Slavoj Žižek and
              Costas Douzinas. Birkbeck Institute for the Humanities, Birkbeck College, London.
              Badiou, A. (2007) De quoi Sarkozy est-il le nom?Paris: Nouvelles Éditions Lignes.
              Badiou, A. (2008) ‘Live Badiou – Interview with Alain Badiou, Paris, December
              2007’, pp. 136–9 in O. Feltham (ed.) Alain Badiou – Live Theory. London:
              Continuum.                                                
              Boltanski, L. and E. Chiapello (2007) The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso.
              Boykoff, M., D. Frame and S. Randalls (forthcoming) ‘Stabilize This! How the
              Discourse of “Climate Stabilization” Became and Remains Entrenched in Climate
              Science-policy-practice Interactions’, Journal of the American Association of
              Geographers.                                              
              Brand, U., N. Bullard, E. Lander and T. Mueller (eds) (2009) Contours of Climate
              Justice – Ideas for Shaping New Climate and Energy Politics. Critical Currents
              No.6. Uppsala: Dag Hammerskjöld Foundation.               
              Bumpus, A.G. and D. Liverman (2008) ‘Accumulation by Decarbonization and the
              Governance of Carbon Offsets’, Economic Geography84(2): 127–55.
              Canovan, M. (1999) ‘Trust the People! Populism and the Two Faces of Democracy’,
              Political Studies47: 2–16.                                
              Canovan, M. (2005) The People. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
              Castree, N. (2009) ‘The Environmental Wedge: Neoliberalism, Democracy and the
              Prospect for a New British Left’, pp. 222–33 in P. Devine, A. Pearman and D. Purdy
              (eds) Feelbad Britain – How to Make It Better. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
              Crouch, C. (2004) Post-Democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
              Davis, M. (1999) Ecology of Fear – Los Angeles and the Imagination of Disaster.
              New York: Vintage Books.                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 18]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 230
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             230 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             Davis, M. (2002) Dead Cities, and Other Tales. New York: New Press/London: I.B.
             Tauris.                                                    
             Dean, M. (1999) Governmentality – Power and Rule in Modern Society. London:
             SAGE.                                                      
             Demeritt, D. (2001) ‘The Construction of Global Warming and the Politics of
             Science’, Annals of the Association of American Geographers91(2): 307–37.
             Derrida, J. (1992) ‘Of an Apocalyptic Tone Recently Adopted in Philosophy’,
             pp. 25–72 in H.G. Coward and T. Foshey (eds) Derrida and Negative Theology.
             Albany: State University of New York Press.                
             Dikeç, M. (2005) ‘Space, Politics and the Political’, Environment and Planning D:
             Society and Space23: 171–88.                               
             Giddens, A. (2009) The Politics of Climate Change. Cambridge: Polity Press.
             Hulme, M. (2008) ‘Geographical Work at the Boundaries of Climate Change’, Trans-
             actions of the Institute of British Geographers33(1): 5–11.
             Hulme, M. (2009) Why We Disagree about Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
             University Press.                                          
             IPCC (2007) Fourth Assessment Report, Climate Change 2007. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.                                
             IPCC (2009) Climate Change 2007 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability:
             Working Group II contribution to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC.
             Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.                     
             Jameson, F. (2003) ‘Future City’, New Left Review21: 65–79.
             Jay, M. (1994) ‘The Apocalyptic Imagination and the Inability to Mourn’, pp. 30–47
             in G. Robinson and J. Rundell (eds) Rethinking Imagination – Culture and
             Creativity. New York: Routledge.                           
             Katz, C. (1995) ‘Under the Falling Sky: Apocalyptic Environmentalism and the
             Production of Nature’, pp. 276–82 in A. Callari, S. Cullenberg and C. Biewener
             (eds) Marxism in the Postmodern Age. New York: The Guilford Press.
             Laclau, E. (2005) On Populist Reason. London: Verso.       
             Lacoue-Labarthe, P. and J.-L. Nancy (1997) Retreating the Political. London:
             Routledge.                                                 
             Latour, B. (1993) We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
             Press.                                                     
             Latour, B. (2004) ‘Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to
             Matters of Concern’, Critical Inquiry30(2): 225–48.        
             Lemke, T. (1999) ‘“The Birth of Bio-politics” – Michel Foucault’s Lectures at the
             Collège de France on Neo-liberal Governmentality’, Economy & Society 30(2):
             190–207.                                                   
             Levene, M. (2005) ‘Rescue! History – A Manifesto for the Humanities in the Age
             of Climate Change – An Appeal for Collaborators’ (Vol. 2006). Southampton: Forum
             for the Study of Crisis in the 21st Century, URL (consulted July 2009):
             http://www.crisis-forum.org.uk/rescue_history.htm          
             Liverman, D.M. (2009) ‘Conventions of Climate Change: Constructions of Danger
             and the Dispossession of the Atmosphere’, Journal of Historical Geography 35(2):
             279–96.                                                    
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 19]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 231
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                    Swyngedouw– Apocalypse Forever? 231 
                                                                        
              Marchart, O. (2007) Post-foundational Political Thought – Political Difference in
              Nancy, Lefort, Badiou and Laclau. Edinburgh: Edinburgh: University Press.
              Marquand, D. (2004) Decline of the Public: The Hollowing Out of Citizenship.
              Cambridge: Polity Press.                                  
              Marx, K. (2004 [1867]) Capital, vol. 1. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
              Mouffe, C. (2005) On the Political. London: Routledge.    
              Mudde, C. (2004) ‘The Populist Zeitgeist’, Government and Opposition39(4): 542–63.
              Plato (2003) The Republic. Harmondsworth: Penguin.        
              Rancière, J. (1998) Disagreement. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
              Rancière, J. (2001) ‘Ten Theses on Politics’, Theory & Event5(3), URL (consulted
              January 2010): http://muse.jhu.edu/login?uri=/journals/theory_and_event/v005/5.3
              ranciere.html                                             
              Rancière, J. (2004) ‘Introducing Disagreement’, Angelaki9(3): 3–9.
              Rancière, J. (2006) Hatred of Democracy. London: Verso.   
              Scherpe, K.R. (1987) ‘Dramatization and De-dramatization of “The End”: The
              Apocalyptic Consciousness of Modernity and Post-Modernity’, Cultural Critique5:
              95–129.                                                   
              Smith, N. (2008) ‘Afterword to the Third Edition’, pp. 239–66 in N. Smith (ed.)
              Uneven Development. London: University of Georgia Press.  
              Stavrakakis, Y. (1997) ‘Green Fantasy and the Real of Nature: Elements of a
              Lacanian Critique of Green Ideological Discourse’, Journal for the Psychoanalysis
              of Culture & Society2(1): 123–32.                         
              Stavrakakis, Y. (2000) ‘On the Emergence of Green Ideology: The Dislocation
              Factor in Green Politics’, pp. 100–18 in D. Howarth, A.J. Norval and Y. Stavrakakis
              (eds) Discourse Theory and Political Analysis – Indentities, Hegemonies and Social
              Change. Manchester: Manchester University Press.          
              Swyngedouw, E. (2006) ‘Circulations and Metabolisms: (Hybrid) Natures and
              (Cyborg) Cities’, Science as Culture15(2): 105–21.        
              Swyngedouw, E. (2007) ‘Impossible/Undesirable Sustainability and the Post-
              political Condition’, pp. 13–40 in J.R. Krueger and D. Gibbs (eds) The Sustainable
              Development Paradox. New York: Guilford Press.            
              Swyngedouw, E. (2009a) ‘The Antinomies of the Post-political City: In Search of a
              Democratic Politics of Environmental Production’, International Journal of Urban
              and Regional Research33(3): 601–20.                       
              Swyngedouw, E. (2009b) ‘The Zero-ground of Politics: Musings on the Post-
              political City’, NewGeographies1(1): 52–61.               
              Swyngedouw, E. (forthcoming) ‘The Trouble with Nature: Ecology as the New Opium
              for the Masses’, in P. Healey and J. Hillier (eds) Conceptual Challenges for Planning
              Theory. Aldershot: Ashgate.                               
              Thomson, A.J.P. (2003) ‘Re-placing the Opposition: Rancière and Derrida’, paper
              presented at conference ‘Fidelity to the Disagreement’, Goldsmith’s College,
              University of London, 16–17 September.                    
              Urbinati, N. (2003) ‘Can Cosmopolitan Democracy be Democratic?’, Political Theory
              Daily Review, URL (consulted January 2010): http://www.politicaltheory.info/
              essays/urbinati.htm                                       
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        

[PAGE 20]
      213-232 TCS358728 Swyngedouw_Article 156 x 234mm 30/03/2010 16:09 Page 232
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
             232 Theory, Culture & Society 27(2–3)                      
                                                                        
             Žižek, S. (1998) ‘A Leftist Plea for “Eurocentrism”’, Critical Inquiry 24(4):
             998–1009                                                   
             Žižek, S. (1999) The Ticklish Subject – The Absent Centre of Political Ontology.
             London: Verso.                                             
             Žižek, S. (2002) Revolution at the Gates – Žižek on Lenin – The 1917 Writings.
             London: Verso.                                             
             Žižek, S. (2006a) ‘Against the Populist Temptation’, Critical Inquiry 32(spring):
             551–74.                                                    
             Žižek, S. (2006b) The Parallax View. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
             Žižek, S. (2008) ‘Censorship Today: Violence, or Ecology as a New Opium for the
             Masses’, URL (consulted January 2010): http://www.lacan.com/zizecology1.htm
                                                                        
             Erik Swyngedouw is Professor of Human Geography at the University of
             Manchester. He recently published Social Power and the Urbanization of
             Water: Flows of Power(Oxford University Press) and co-edited In the Nature
             of Cities: The Politics of Urban Metabolism (Routledge). He is preparing a
             book on ‘Environment, Power and Modernization in Spain, 1898–2008’.
             [email: erik.swyngedouw@manchester.ac.uk]                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                        