[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
           ‘        ’                    2025,Vol.51(5)853–882
      The   mystical foundation  of                          
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2023   
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      democratic   society,              sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537231187557
                                 The                         
      mythmaking    and truth in         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Man   Who  Shot Liberty Valance                        
      (John Ford  1962)                                      
      Camil Ungureanu                                       
      UniversitatPompeuFabra,Spain                           
                                                             
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      Inthisarticle,Icombinepoliticalphilosophyandfilmtoexaminetheproblematicofthe
      ‘mystical’ foundation of authority and democracy as represented in The Man Who Shot
      Liberty Valance. Ford’s filmic vision is interpretable as a parable of the passage from the
      stateofnaturetothemodernrepublicandthedeconstructionofAmericandemocratic
      progressivism.Toanalyse it,Iproceedintwo steps:first,Idefend amiddle-waycritical
      Enlightenmentperspectivebetweenthedemocratic-progressivistandthedeconstructive
      approach to the question of foundations. Second, in dialogue with this critical Enlight-
      enment perspective, I argue that Ford’s cinematic vision of the foundation remains
      ambivalent, given that its deconstruction of the mythology of American democratic
      progressivism is premised on the nostalgic mythologizing of the pre-democratic age.
      Moreover, Itakeissuewith Robert Pippin’sinterpretation ofthe movie as acautionary
      taleagainstEnlightenmentrationalism,andwhichposesatitscenterthekeypsychological
      roleofmythsinpolitics(2011).Incontrast,IarguethatFord’scinematicvisioncautions
      againstdecouplingthesocio-politicalandpersonallifefromthevitalconnectiontotruth
      and acting upon truth. From this standpoint, a “politics of truth” is, against Pippin’s
      interpretationofFord’svision,compatiblewithtakingintoaccounttheconstitutiverole
      of narratives in building political legitimacy and authority.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      CamilUngureanu,DepartmentofPoliticalandSocialScience,UniversitatPompeuFabra,c/RamonTrias
      Fargas,25-27,Barcelona08001,Spain.                     
      Email:camil.ungureanu@upf.edu                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      854                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      Keywords                                               
      law, violence, narrative, myth, truth, Enlightenment, Western, John Ford, Jacques
      Derrida, Jürgen Habermas, Robert Pippin                
                                                             
                                                             
        “…asilenceiswalledupintheviolentstructureofthefoundingact.Walledup,walledin
        because silence isnot exterior to language…”(Derrida 1992,13-4).
                                                             
      Introduction                                           
                                                             
      In recent years, the interest of social and political philosophers in filmmaking has been
      thriving in different continental and analytical traditions (Mulhall 2016; Pippin 2011,
      2020; P´ıa Lara 2020; Rancière 2009). As part of this revival, John Ford’s movies – the
      object of an outstanding tradition of scholarship in film studies and historical research
      (Bogdanovich 1967; Bordwell, Staiger and Thompson 1988; Gallagher 1988; McBride
      2001,2011;Sarris1975;StudlarandBernstein2001)–havebeenusefullyanalysedwith
      the tools of political and social philosophy (Bo¨hnke 2001; Brunkhorst 2006; Pippin
      2011).Moreover,differentthinkershavepersuasivelyarguedagainstarestrictedviewof
      philosophical reflection as the monopoly of professional philosophers. From this per-
      spective, visionary artworks can play a philosophical role by containing valuable re-
      flections, imaginative resources and critical arguments on the human condition, society
      andpolitics(Hustvedt2012;Mihai2022;Mulhall2016;Nussbaum1992;P´ıaLara2020;
      Pippin 2011; Bradatan and Ungureanu 2014, 2016).       
        In this article, I build on this trend to examine the problematic of the ‘mystical’
      foundation of authority (Derrida 1992) and democracy as represented in The Man Who
      ShotLibertyValance(dir.JohnFord1962)andreflectonkeyissuesindemocratictheory.
      Ford’sfilmicvisionisinterpretableasaparableofthepassagefromthestateofnature(the
      WildWest)tothemoderndemocraticrepublic(Bo¨hnke2001;Brunkhorst2006;Leutrat
      1997; Pippin 2011). To analyse it, I proceed in two steps: first, I outline a middle-way
      aporetic perspective between the democratic-progressivist and the deconstructive ap-
      proachtothequestionoffoundationsthatdrawsonthesestandsyetavoidstheirmirror
      conceptual difficulties – viz., Jürgen Habermas’ reconciling imagery and Jacques Der-
      rida’shyperbolicrhetoricofparadoxes.Tothisend,IcontraposeHabermas’democratic
      progressivism (I.1), the analogue of Stoddard’s idealism in Ford’s vision, to Derrida’s
      deconstruction focused on violence and exclusion (I.2). In contrast to democratic pro-
      gressivism,deconstructionhighlightsconstitutiveaporiasanda‘silencewalledup’inthe
      ‘mystical’ moment of founding authority (Derrida 1992; see also Honig 1991, 2001;
      Michelman 1997, 2001; Ferrara 2001).                   
        Second,IdiscussFord’sfilmicdeconstructionofAmericandemocraticprogressivism
      anditsrepresentationofthe‘mystical’foundationofauthorityanddemocracy.Notunlike
      Habermas, Ransom Stoddard, the civilizational ‘hero’ and the personification of the
      Americanmythofdemocraticprogress,obfuscatestheinternalrelationbetweenlawand
      (extra-legal)force,aswellastheexclusions‘walledup’intheactoffoundationandthe
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      855     
                                                             
                                                             
      democratic practice. However, Ford’s masterpiece remains ambivalent, given that his
      deconstructionofthemythologyofAmericandemocraticprogressivism1ispremisedon
      the nostalgic mythologizing of the pre-democratic age. 
        Moreover,ItakeissuewithRobertPippin’sinterpretationofthemovieasacautionary
      taleagainstEnlightenmentrationalism(2011),posingatitscentrethekeypsychological
      role of myths in politics (2011, 20). In contrast, I argue that Ford’s cinematic vision
      cautionsagainstdecouplingthesocio-politicalandpersonallifefromthevitalconnection
      totruthandactingupontruth.Fromthisstandpoint,a‘politicsoftruth’is,againstPippin’s
      interpretationofFord’svision,compatiblewithtakingintoaccounttheconstitutiveroleof
      narrativesinbuildinglegal-politicallegitimacyandauthority.ThiscriticalEnlightenment
      perspective2 envisages an interconnectedness between rationality, affect and embodied
      narratives in the constitution of the democratic practice (Eagleman 2017; Shiller 2019)
      without conflating those myths built on manipulation and falsehood3 with inspiring
      narratives and ‘moral stories’ (Lakoff 2016; Shiller 2019; Ruiz Collantes 2019) (II).
        Methodologically,mycross-readingfollowstheargumentthatphilosopherscanenrich
      the debate on the significance and the experience of artworks. Conversely, art can do a
      valuable philosophical job by providing inspiring reflections, critical arguments and
      alternativeimaginariesaboutexistingphilosophicalparadigms(Mulhall2016;Nussbaum
      1992; P´ıa Lara 2020; Pippin 2011, 2020). My concern is not to impose a fixed philo-
      sophicalmeaningontofilmslikeTheManWhoShotLibertyValancethatarenotoriously
      recalcitrant to clear-cutcategories butto enrich their discussion against thebackground
      of recent philosophical debates.4                      
      I. Squaring the circle? The debate concerning the foundation of
      the democratic community                               
      1.Democratic progressivism and the question of foundation
                                                             
      InOnRevolution(1965),HannahArendtarguesthatanaporiaorpetitioprincipiimarks
      the foundation of the political community: those who get together to set up a new
      constitutional community are themselves unconstitutional. That is, they have no con-
      stitutionalauthoritytodowhattheysetouttoachieveinthefirstplace(Arendt1965,183-
      4;Habermas2001;Honig1991).EchoingJean-JacquesRousseau,Arendtmaintainsthat
      trying to solve this aporia is like ‘squaring the circle’ (Arendt 1965, 184; Honig 1991,
      2001;OchoaEspejo2011;Sirczuk2018).5Thelegitimationofthepouvoirconstituantto
      groundamoderndemocracyisextra-legaland,moreover,extra-democraticgiventhatthe
      interpretation of the law and the definition of the people (who is in/out) are instituted
      through the force of the founding act.6                
        Thequestionoftheaporeticfoundationofthedemocraticcommunitydividespolitical
      philosophers into two camps – viz. those aiming to solve the foundational aporias and
      those underscoring them (Derrida 1986, 1992, 2005; Ferrara 2001; Habermas 2001;
      Honig2001;Michelman1997,2001;Schmitt2006;Sirczuk2018).Consider,first,those
      who argue, from the perspective of democratic progressivism, that aporias do not
      characterize the foundation. More specifically, Habermas – the most sophisticated
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      856                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      representative of this line of thought rooted in Enlightenment rationalism – proposes a
      neo-Kantiansolutiontotheallegedparadoxesoffoundationinthecontextofthedebate
      between liberals and civic republicans and the controversy regarding the constitutional
      foundation of the European Union (Habermas 1996, 2001).
        Habermasdealswithtwoaporeticaspectsofthefoundationalmomentingeneral:first,
      hepointsoutthatmoderndemocracyhastwosourcesoflegitimationthatappeartobein
      contradiction–viz., theruleoflaw(underscored byliberals) andthewillofthepeople
      (highlighted by civic republicans). These two principles seem to be in ‘contradiction’,
      mostvisiblyinthefoundationalmoment,astheypullinoppositedirections:modernlaw
      (e.g., human rights) pre-determines the rules of the democratic game; yet, in a modern
      democracy, the will of the people is sovereign. Second, Habermas considers the
      seemingly aporetic ‘self-institution’ (2001, 761) of any democratic regime; echoing
      Arendt, Habermas points out that the act of foundation seems to be fraught with cir-
      cularity, as it draws its legitimation from what it institutes (a specific set of laws; a
      particular definition of the people). No absolute Grund or ‘objective transparency’ is
      availableunderconditionsofmodernpluralism.Consequently,nobedrockcanstopwhat
      Frank Michelman calls the ‘infinite regress’ of legitimation (Habermas 2001, 760;
      Michelman 1997, 123).7                                 
        Tosolvetheseseemingaporeticaspectsofthefoundation,Habermasproposesashift
      inperspectivefromthefixationonasinglemoment(thefoundation)tofocusingonthe
      people and the constitution-making as open-ended historical processes. The alleged
      aporia of the relation between democracy and the rule of law, in addition to that of
      circularity and infinite regress, resolve themselves – argues Habermas – in the di-
      mensionofhistoricaltime,ifoneconceivestheconstitutivemomentastheperformative
      beginningofaprocessofconstitution-makingandrationallearningbasedonthe‘force
      of the argument’ that continues across generations (Habermas, 2001, 768) the ‘single
      right solution’. In his reconstructive view, the foundational moment, then, is not a
      Schmittian decision ex nihilo but the beginning of a practice of democratic-
      constitutional learning:                               
        “aconstitutionthatisdemocratic—notjustinitscontentbutalsoaccordingtoitssourceof
        legitimation—isatradition-buildingprojectwithaclearlymarkedbeginningintime.Allthe
        latergenerationshavethetaskofactualizingthestill-untappednormativesubstanceofthe
        systemofrightslaiddownintheoriginaldocumentoftheconstitution.Accordingtothis
        dynamicunderstandingoftheconstitution,ongoinglegislationcarriesonthesystemofrights
        by interpreting and adapting rights for current circumstances… To be sure, this fallible
        continuation of the founding event can break out of the circle of a polity’s groundless
        discursive self-constitution only if this process—which is not immune to contingent in-
        terruptionsandhistoricalregressions—canbeunderstoodinthelongrunasaself-correcting
        learning process”(Habermas 2001,774).                
        Inthisongoingprocessofrationallearningintime,thedevelopmentoftheruleoflaw
      (emphasizedbyliberals)andtheformationofpeople’swill(highlightedbyrepublicans)
      are not in a paradoxical relation but in one of co-dependence (Habermas 1996, ch. 2,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      857     
                                                             
                                                             
      2001).Theargumentfromco-dependenceispremisedonasynthesisbetweenliberaland
      civic republican insights:                             
        “Accordingtotheliberalview,thedemocraticlegislativeprocessrequiresaspecificformof
        legalinstitutionalizationifitistoleadtolegitimateregulations.A‘basiclaw’isintroducedas
        the necessary andsufficient condition for the democratic process itself, not for its results:
        democracycannotdefinedemocracy.Therelationshipbetweendemocracyasthesourceof
        legitimation and constitutionalism that does not need democratic legitimation poses no
        paradox, however. Constitutive rules that first make democracy possible cannot constrain
        democratic practice in the manner of externally imposed norms. By simply clarifying the
        concepts,theallegedparadoxdisappears:enablingconditionsshouldnotbeconfusedwith
        constraining conditions”(Habermas 2001, 768;seealso Habermas 1996,2003).8
                                                             
        Themodernviewofpeople’ssovereigntyis,fromthisprocessualperspective,nottobe
      mistakenforanyexerciseofpopularpower,includingtheauthoritarianone;quitetothe
      contrary, the concept of people’s sovereignty is premised on the modern law and the
      humanrights.Conversely,modernlawisnot,properlyunderstood,externaltothewillof
      thepeoplebutisdynamicallyconstructedthroughtheexerciseofthewillofthepeoplein
      historical time.                                       
        ForHabermas,thisdynamicofhistoricallearningbasedon‘theforceoftheargument’
      (Habermas 1996, 2003) is premised on strong teleological idealizations (truth, justice)
      implicitly raised in the performative foundational moment, and which are never fully
      achieved (Cooke 1997). In the United States, for instance, women, Black people and
      indigenouspeopleareexcludedduringtheprocessoffoundation;yet,atthesametime,
      theperformativeactoffoundationinitiatesaconstitutional-democraticprocessoflearning
      andself-correctionorientedbythecollectivesearchforthe‘singlerightsolution’orthe
      truth of the matter (Habermas 1996, 2003; Ungureanu and Monti 2018). As Habermas
      argues, his future-oriented or teleological vision of constitutional learning is
        “predicated on the nontrivial assumption that later generations will start with the same
        standards as did the founders. Whoever bases her judgment today on the normative ex-
        pectation of complete inclusion and mutual recognition and the expectation of equal op-
        portunities for utilizing equal rights must assume that she can find these standards by
        reasonablyappropriatingtheconstitutionanditshistoryofinterpretation.Thedescendants
        canlearnfrompastmistakesonlyiftheyare‘inthesameboat’astheirforebears.Theymust
        imputetoallthepreviousgenerationsthesameintentionofcreatingandexpandingthebases
        foravoluntaryassociationofcitizenswhomaketheirlaws.Allparticipantsmustbeableto
        recognize the project as the same throughout history and to judge it from the same per-
        spective”(Habermas2001,775).                         
        In Habermas’ neo-Kantian vision, these cross-generational idealizations (e.g., truth,
      justice) raised in the foundation’s performative moment orient the learning dynamic
      throughout history. They further imply the ideal reconciliation among the people sup-
      portingthe‘sameperspective’9onthe‘singlerightsolution’orthetruthofthematterand,
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      858                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      thus, the dissolution of the alleged aporias of the foundations (Ungureanu and Monti
      2018).                                                 
        How persuasive is Habermas’ democratic progressivism? The Habermasian con-
      ception convincingly abandons the attempt to answer the foundational aporias by an
      appeal to an absolute Grund or pregiven moral truths. In pluralistic constitutional de-
      mocracies, the appeal to absolute certitudes and an ultimate foundation of legitimacy
      becomes unavailable. It has been replaced by the deliberative processes oriented by an
      idea of truth and justice that can be only approximatively realized.10 Habermas per-
      suasively criticizes those who take a pre-existing European identity or people as a
      foundation of the constitutionalization of the European Union. Against this founda-
      tionalistandstaticperspective,Habermasarguesthattheformationofpeople’swilland
      the constitution-making are co-dependent and processual. As such, they get articulated
      and develop in time.                                   
        Nonetheless, while Habermas’ perspective-shifting at the root of democratic
      progressivismhelpsdrawattentiontothenecessityofabroadertemporalviewanda
      processualapproachtopeople’swill,itfailstodoawaywiththeaporetic‘nature’of
      thefoundationandthedemocraticpractice.Habermas’valuableinsightsarewrapped
      up in an implausible narrative of teleological progress based on a linear temporality
      andstrongidealizationsatoddswithdemocraticpractices(Ferrara2001;Honig2001;
      Wellmer 1998). His democratic progressivism minimizes the question of the violent
      institutionofthebordersofthepoliticalcommunity(whoisintheboat?whoisout?),
      aswellastheintractabledisagreementsandpowerstrugglesinvolvedininterpreting
      the rule of law and people’s will. The historical process of development of the
      democratic need not be seen through the regulative ideal of the final reconciliation
      (Ochoa Espejo 2011). Silenced voices, violence and suffering cannot be ‘redeemed’
      throughlinearprogressofthepeopletowardfinalreconciliationandtruth;theyoccur
      inpracticalcontextsthataresingular,unrepeatable,andthus‘unredeemable’through
      historical learning and reconciliation. In hindsight, Habermas’ fictional ‘common
      boat’ unwillingly calls forth the spectre of those who die crossing the European sea
      border in crammed real-life boats.11                   
        Habermas’neo-Kantianviewofdemocraticpracticeandlegitimacyisbasedontoo
      abstractanideaofrationality/truthandlineartemporality(Capdevilla2023).Habermas’
      versionofdemocraticprogressivismismarkedbyamythologizingimpulsecentredon
      the future, and tributary to the specific European context. The teleological underpin-
      nings of his view emerge from the secularization of the Judeo-Christian theological
      imagination centred on linear historical progress, final truth and reconciliation at ‘the
      endoftimes’.The‘sameboat’and‘sameperspective’aremetaphorsthatsecularizea
      step further Kantian–Christian images of final reconciliation, such as the ‘kingdom of
      ends’.                                                 
        Imovenowtothedeconstructiveviewofthequestionoffoundationanddemocracy
      that emphasizes the questions of aporias, violence and exclusion. Based on a critical
      Enlightenmentperspectivebuildingamiddlewaybetweendemocraticprogressivismand
      deconstruction,Iwillexaminehowthe‘mystical’foundationofauthorityanddemocracy
      is thematized in The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance.     

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      859     
                                                             
                                                             
      2. The ‘mystical’ foundation of authority              
      Intextssuchas‘DeclarationsofIndependence’(1986),‘TheForceofLaw’(1992)and
      Rogues(2015),JacquesDerridadevelopstheviewthatunsolvableaporiasareinherentin
      theexceptionalmomentoffoundationand‘normal’politics(Critchley2014;Honig1991,
      2001;Llevadot2020;Ungureanu2008).12Themomentofthefoundationis,inDerrida’s
      view, fraught with circularity. Derrida’s political philosophy echoes Schmitt’s deci-
      sionism:13Atthefoundation,apoliticalcommunity(apeople),aparticularinterpretation
      of the law and a new authority are set up through an extra-legal ‘decision’. This is, for
      Derrida,anactofviolenceresultingfrompowerstrugglesbetweengroupsandpremised
      on a partial interpretation (a system of rules; a legitimation narrative) that cannot but
      exclude and marginalize. In contrast to Habermas, who conceptually separates modern
      lawandpopularsovereigntyfromviolence,Derridaposestheminaninnerrelationand
      permanent tension. Derrida argues:                     
        “Theveryemergenceofjusticeandlaw,thefoundingandjustifyingmomentthatinstitutes
        lawimpliesaperformativeforce,whichisalwaysaninterpretativeforce:thistimenotinthe
        sense of law in the service of force, its docile instrument, servile and thus exterior to the
        dominantpower,butratherinthesenseoflawthatwouldmaintainamoreinternal,more
        complex relationship with what onecallsforce, power or violence”(Derrida 1992,32).
                                                             
        The foundation of democratic politics is performative in that it generates a new
      politicalpracticemarkedbytheaporeticsplitbetweenthepromiseofjustice(equalityand
      freedom for all) that Derrida calls ‘unconditional’ or ‘infinite’ because it is never fully
      realized or represented, and the conditional or finite interpretation of it – the law, in
      Derrida’sjargon.Theaporiabetweenunconditionaljusticeandconditionalcanneverbe
      overcome and reconciled through a vision of linear progress, downplaying the role of
      historical discontinuities, ruptures and particularity. Still, it is intrinsic to democratic
      practice from its foundation. Through the ‘law’, a collectivity aspires to realize un-
      conditionaljustice;atonce,itcannotbutviolateitbygivingthisconditionalorfiniteform
      through its ‘interpretative force’. The foundational moment of creating a specific and
      bordered political community involves a violent ‘rupture’ that cannot be either neatly
      arranged in a linear-progressive vision of history or reduced to ‘earlier conditions and
      conventions’ (Critchley 2014; Derrida 1992, 16; Llevadot 2020; Ungureanu 2008,
      2019a).Asaresult,whileDerridalooks,notunlikeHabermas,atthefoundationfroma
      ‘historical perspective’, he rejects the notion of a linear-homogenous temporality and
      reconciliation in mentis. Derrida argues:              
        “Evenifthesuccessofperformativesthatfoundlaworright(forexample,andthisismore
        than an example, of a state as guarantor of a right) presupposes earlier conditions and
        conventions(forexample,inthenationalorinternationalarena),thesame‘mystical’limit
        willreappearatthesupposedoriginofsaidconditions,rules,orconventions,andattheorigin
        of their dominant interpretation”(Derrida1992,13)    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      860                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
        The‘mystical’dimensionrefersheretostructuralsilence‘walledup’inthemomentof
      foundation, that is, the silence over injustices and untruths that can never be fully
      thematizedandreconciledthroughconstitutionallearning(Habermas);theycanbeonly
      partially ‘shown’14 and tackled in time:               
        “(The) very moment of foundation or institution (of law) (which in any case is never a
        momentinscribedinthehomogeneoustissueofahistory,sinceitisrippedapartwithone
        decision), the operation that amounts to founding, inaugurating, justifying law (droit),
        makinglaw,wouldconsistofacoupdeforce,ofaperformativeandthereforeinterpretative
        violencethatinitselfisneitherjustnorunjustandthatnojusticeandnopreviouslawwithits
        founding anterior moment could guarantee or contradict or invalidate. No justificatory
        discoursecouldorshouldinsuretheroleofmetalanguageinrelationtotheperformativityof
        institutivelanguageortoitsdominantinterpretation.Herethediscoursecomesupagainstits
        limit…ItiswhatIhereproposetocallthemystical.Hereasilenceiswalledupintheviolent
        structure of the founding act. Walled up, walled in because silence is not exterior to
        language…”(Derrida 1992,13-4).                       
        Fromthisperspective,then,theperformativeactoffoundationmayinvokeuniversal
      principles of legitimation or be underpinned by an aspiration to infinite justice but is
      alwaysmarkedbyparticular‘silences’orblindspotsatthelevelofnarrativeandpractice:
      silenced injustices, exclusions and biases in the community that can neither be fully
      understoodnorreconciled(Derrida1992,2005).Asaresult,theaporiasofthefoundation
      also characterize ‘normal politics’. The key task of political philosophy conceived by
      Derridaistomakeexplicitaporiasinanunendingprocessofdeconstructingthebiases,
      exclusionsandviolenceofthedominantinterpretationsandpracticesundertheurgentcall
      for infinite justice.                                  
        HowpersuasiveisDerrida’sdeconstruction?Onthecritical side,Derrida’sapproach
      suffers from the hyperbolic rhetoric of aporias and a messianism of infinite justice that
      risks losing contact with the diversity and the imperfection of democratic politics.
      Whereas the tensions inherent in a democratic community are diverse and shaped by
      context, Derrida monothematically overgeneralizes the same ‘maddening’ aporetic
      structure (conditional/unconditional), which heunveilstime and again atthecore ofall
      humanpractices,betheypolitical,moral,legal,religiousoraesthetic(Ungureanu2013,
      2019a).15 Consequently, he champions the unfruitful idea that every political and legal
      interpretationanddecisionisa‘totalreinvention’involvinggoingthroughthe‘madness’
      of the aporia between conditional law and unconditional justice. But this is a phe-
      nomenologically unfruitful and normatively overburdening analysis of the democratic
      societyandpeople’slife.WhereasHabermas minimizestheroleofdecisionsinpolitics
      and lawmaking, Derrida’s hyperbolizes it by making Schmitt ‘good’ for ethics and
      democratic theorizing. Neither regular people nor politicians nor judges are ‘moral
      heroes’goingthroughthequalmsofinfinitejusticeinmakingdecisions,northebulkof
      politicalandlegaldecisionsandinterpretationsareorshouldbe‘absolutely’reinventedin
      every case.                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      861     
                                                             
                                                             
        On the positive side, deconstruction helps highlight the relevance of aporias for
      theorizingfoundationsandinproblematizingkeyelementsofdemocraticprogressivism,
      suchasthelinearviewofprogressandthecorrespondingsideliningofthequestionsof
      power/violence,exclusion,orsingularity.MycriticaltheoreticalviewdrawsonDerrida’s
      deconstruction and Habermas’ public reason approach while eschewing the hyperbolic
      rhetoricofparadoxes,infinitejustice,ontheonehand,andteleologicalrationalism,onthe
      other. Let me highlight four traits of this critical Enlightenment perspective that are of
      interest for the subsequent discussion of Ford’s filmic deconstruction of democratic
      progressivism and its ambivalence.                     
        First, from a critical theoretical perspective drawing on the legacy of the Enlight-
      enment,boththefoundationandthepost-foundationaldemocraticpracticearemarkedby
      variousstructuraltensionsandaporias–forexample,popularsovereignty/theruleoflaw,
      gender equality/cultural recognition, animal rights/freedom of religion, general rule/
      exception–thatcannotbefinallyovercomeorreconciled.16Considertheaporetictension
      between people’s sovereignty and modern law (see also supra I.1.). As Habermas un-
      derscores,modernlawisnotaclosedtextbutdevelopsthroughtheactiveinvolvementof
      the people and its representatives. However, while there is an internal link between
      people’swillandconstitutionalism,theseprinciplesoflegitimationalsopullindifferent
      directions.Inthehistoricaldevelopmentofthelegal-democraticpractice,thepeopleasan
      anarchicmultitudeofgroupsandforcesareinsideandoutsidethelegalframework.17The
      dynamicoftheinterpretationandexpansionoftheframeworkofrightsandlibertieshas
      oftenbeenbasedonpopularactsofresistanceandself-affirmation,thatis,onrupturing
      eventssuchasprotests,generalstrikes,actsofdisobedience,rebellionsandotherpower
      manifestations of the ‘unruly’ people. The power and will of popular multitudes can
      manifestthemselvesinsideoroutsidetheexistingconstitutionalframework,challenging
      it in various (non)radical and nonradical ways (Ochoa Especho 2011). Habermas’
      sanitized vision of the force of people or popular multitudes cannot account for the
      constitutivetensionsbetweenpopularsovereigntyandtheruleoflaw,aswellasforthe
      rupturedhistoryofthetransformationsandprogressofworkers’rights,therighttoself-
      determination, women’s rights or, more recently, of animal and ecological rights. The
      aporetic relationshipbetween the people’s sovereignty and therule of law signifies that
      thereisatonceaninnerrelationandtensionbetweenthemthatmarkboththefoundation
      of democracy and post-foundational politics.           
        Second,thisaporeticviewisnotatoddswiththequestionofprogressbutonlywitha
      teleologicaland/ortotalizingviewofit.Inthisconception,thereisnoneedeitherforthe
      metaphysical postulate of definitive criteria of progress or the best political model. The
      appreciation of ameliorations and positive transformations depends not on claiming
      accesstoabsoluteandtranshistoricalcriteriaorthebestmodel(Rawls)butonfallibleand
      plural criteria (Sen 2009). The advancements in gender equality, environmental justice
      andanimalrightsindifferentconstitutionaldemocraciesareinsufficientbutundeniable,
      even if feminism, animal rights activists and environmentalists are and will remain di-
      vided over arguments, criteria and practical strategies.
        Third, this view gives crucial importance to embodied narratives and affects in the
      political struggles for legitimacy and the constitution of political communities. The

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      862                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      constitution of a political community and authority is not based on the ‘force of the
      argument’orbruteforcebutispremisedinteraliaonpublicnarrativesoflegitimationthat
      appeal to people’s imagination and generate emotion, commitment and mobilization
      (RuizCollantes2019).Likewise,authorityisconstructedonnarrativelegitimacyandnot
      merelyonabstractrationalityornakedforce.Pippin(2011)makesasimilarpointinhis
      interpretationofFord’smovies(seelater)whenhighlightingthatphilosophershaveoften
      glossedovertheimportanceofpolitical psychology,namely therelevanceofmythsfor
      creating allegiances necessary for constituting and perpetuating a political community
      (Bottici2007;Pippin2011:20;RuizCollantes2019).Theargumentfromthecentralityof
      storytelling or narrative in human behaviour and politics has been borne by recent
      research in cognitive science, neuroscience, brain research and economics (Eagleman
      2017;Lakoff2016;Shiller2019).AstheleadingneuroscientistDavidEaglemanargues,
      the brain is a ‘storyteller’ (2017: 35). Humans are, as Charles Taylor (1989) claims,
      ‘interpretive animals’ – they create and live in a world of embodied interpretations or
      narratives.18                                          
        Nonetheless,thisargumentcantakequestionableanti-Enlightenmentandconservative
      paternalist forms (Renan 2015; Scruton 2002, 156-7). In his famed lecture ‘What is a
      nation?’(1882),Renangivesananti-rationalistspintothisargument:‘Forgetting,Iwould
      evensayhistoricalerror,isanessentialfactorinthecreationofanation,anditisforthis
      reasonthattheprogressofhistoricalstudiesoftenposesathreattonationality.Historical
      inquiry, in effect, throws light on the violent acts that have taken place at the origin of
      every political formation, even those that have been the most benevolent in their con-
      sequences’ (Renan 1882/2015). Renan’s stand verges on the reactionary. While Pippin
      surelydoesnotgoasfarasRenan,heisskepticalofthepossibilityofapoliticsoftruthin
      maintaining the allegiance indispensable for a working political community. This is,
      instead, thefunction ofmyths(Pippin2011).Yet,thisstand isunconvincing:narrative-
      buildingandapoliticsoftrutharenotmutuallyexclusive,eveniftheycanclash.Tothe
      contrary,apoliticsoftruthuncoveringsilencedviolenceandinjusticesatthefoundational
      momentmaytriggeraquestforreshapingnarrativesaccordingtonewhistoricalfindings
      and moral transformations. Such politics can drive practical improvements, more in-
      clusionandmutualcommitment,andthusstrengthencommunity-building.Notonlythe
      psychological-instrumental function of narratives but also their substance has a crucial
      relevance.Considertwoexamples.Bringingtolightthehistoricalandmoraltruthabout
      George Washington as a slave owner helps build a complex image of the past without
      undercuttingtheappreciationforhisexemplarypoliticalmerits.Suchrefashioningofthe
      publicnarrativepreservesthevitallinkbetweendemocraticpoliticsandmoral-historical
      truthsunderthethreatofvariousauthoritarianpopulismstradinginspecificmythsbased
      onfakenewsandemotionalmanipulation(UngureanuandSerrano2018).Similarly,the
      case of Martin Luther King and the civil rights movement in the United States is sug-
      gestive: Despite the enduring presence of racial injustices in the United States, ques-
      tioning the contradiction between the foundational universalist narrative and the
      exclusion of Afro-Americans has triggered a shift in public narratives and significant
      advancements concerning their rights and freedoms.     
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      863     
                                                             
                                                             
        Finally, this perspective gives a key role to power and violence in thinking about
      democraticpolitics.InHabermas’view,modernlawisbasedonrationalizedforceand,
      thus,theeliminationofviolence(Habermas1996).However,thisidealizingconception
      externalizingex-cathedrathequestionofviolenceistoofarfromactualpracticesandrisks
      losingitscriticaldent.Thedialecticalrelationshipbetweenlawand(violent)exclusions
      marksdemocraticpractices.Whilesomeactsofviolenceareimmediatelytransparent,the
      foundationispremisedonblindspotsandsilencesthatare‘walledup’(or‘mystical’)–
      andthatalsomarksthedevelopmentofthepost-foundationaldemocraticpractice,thatis,
      by practical exclusions that are narratively legitimized or camouflaged – consider the
      placeofwomen,Afro-Americans,theindigenouspopulationsandsexualminoritiesinthe
      politicalhistoryoftheUnitedStates.Fromacriticaltheoreticalperspectivethatdrawson
      the Enlightenment legacy, the traces of past and present injustices cannot be absorbed
      through constitutional learning and evolving rationality towards the people’s mythical
      unity of the ‘same perspective’. In the absence of a Grund – be it understood as God,
      ‘transparentobjectivity’,self-evidenttruthsorsublimatedasatelos–andfixedcriteriaof
      justice, the founding act of a concrete political community has a ‘mystical’ dimension.
      The performative foundation of creating a bounded political community or a ‘people’
      involvessilencesandaporias–forexample,law/violence,people’ssovereignty/modern
      law,generalrules/singularity,progress/exclusion–thatareimperfectlyworkedoutinthe
      performative practice of constitutional democracy. A critical theory drawing on the
      tradition of Enlightenment aims at unveiling aporias and thematizing blind spots and
      hidden violence with the purpose of a ‘possible and necessary transformation, some-
      times…(the)… amelioration…’ (Derrida 1992: 14) of current democratic practices.
        In short, I’ve sketched a critical theoretical perspective sensitive to the aporias of
      democraticpracticeandtheinterweavingofrationality,affectandembodiednarrativesin
      specificcontexts.Thisperspectivefindsamiddlewaybetweendemocraticprogressivism
      and the monotonous exaltation of the same aporia between conditionality and uncon-
      ditionality. Based on this discussion of the ‘mystical’ foundation of the democratic
      communitymarkedbyaporias,InowanalyseTheManWhoShotLibertyValanceandits
      vision of the passage from the Wild West to the new republic.
      II. The ‘mystical’ foundation of authority in The Man Who Shot
      Liberty Valance                                        
      Ford’s vision is, I argue, a parable of the foundation that deconstructs American dem-
      ocratic progressivism by drawing attention to the role of violence, narrative legitimacy
      andsilentexclusionsindemocraticpolitics.AsI’veunderscored,PippininterpretsFord’s
      filmasacautionarytaleagainstEnlightenmentrationalism(2011),thebasisofthepublic
      reasonapproachtodemocratic politics(Habermas 1996;Rawls1971).Hearguesthata
      key insight of Ford’s movie is the psychological function of myths in community-
      building;inthissense,Pippinisskepticalofthepossibilityofa‘politicsoftruth’(2011,
      100) in maintaining the necessary allegiances for the proper functioning of a political
      community.                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      864                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
        At a cinematic level, Ford’s film thematizes issues downplayed by the public reason
      approach,suchasthecomplexrelationshipbetweenviolenceandlawandtheimportance
      of narrative for building legitimacy and authority. However, in contrast to Pippin, I
      contendthatthefilmforcefullycautionsagainstuncouplingpersonalandpubliclifefrom
      their liaison to truth and acting on the truth. From this perspective, narratives building
      authority have a psychological-instrumental role and substantive importance corre-
      sponding to their merit and validity (I.2).            
        Let me unpack this argument. The movie was released in 1962, one year before
      PresidentJohnKennedywasshot.Ford’sdisenchantedviewoftheUSdemocracyinThe
      ManWhoShotLibertyValancecouldbeconnectedtotheshiftfromhisearliersocialist-
      progressiveviewandtradeunionactivism,aperiodinwhichhedirectedTheGrapesof
      Wrath (1940), to his later conservatism and complex relationship to McCarthyism
      (McBride2011).However,givenFord’sproverbialsecrecyabouthislifeandfilms(Sarris
      1975) as well as his shifting political allegiances and ‘characteristic political unpre-
      dictability’ (McBride 2001), the significance of his late masterpiece is difficult to cat-
      egorize politically. The immediate political and biographic context does not give us
      decisive clues. In effect, while Ford’s movie articulates recurrent themes anew – for
      example,thedichotomymyth/fact;themarginalizationofminorities–thereisaseeming
      disparitybetweenthecorrosiveportrayalofthenewrepublicandhispoliticalstandatthe
      time of making The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance. In his later years, Ford generally
      leanedtowardsconservatism,yet,forashortperiodintheearly60s,whenthemoviewas
      made, he supported the progressive democrat John Kennedy, his fellow Irishman
      (McBride 2001, 2011; Smith 2018).                      
        TheManWhoShotLibertyValanceinterweavesapoliticalandalovestorybyplacing
      thefoundationintoa‘temporalperspective’throughanextendedflashback.Ford’sstory
      consistsofthreekeymomentsthatbringtogetherandopposethepast(WildWest)andthe
      present (modern republic): (1) the initial arrival of the civilizing hero (Stoddard) in
      Shinbone, which results in a gradual crisis of the equilibrium of forces in the state of
      nature; (2) the culmination of the crisis with the duel between Stoddard and Liberty
      Valance (Lee Marvin) (a), and the subsequent beginnings of democracy (b) and (3) the
      denouement of the story taking place in the present – Doniphan’s funeral and the final
      departure of the dejected civilizing hero and his estranged wife.
      1. The arrival of the civilizing hero and the crisis   
      Inthefirstscene,theagedpoliticianRamsonStoddardandhiswifeHalliearriveonatrain
      from Washington tothesmalltown ofShinbone. The reason for thetrain voyage isthe
      funeraloftheiroldcompanionTomDoniphon(JohnWayne).Stoddardiswelcomedasa
      celebrity with full honours. In Shinbone, the young and unknown Stoddard started his
      illustrious career as a lawyer and politician and met Hallie, his future wife.
        The local newspaper interviews the illustrious statesman, prompting his extended
      flashback that makes up much of the movie. The flashback begins with Stoddard’s first
      arrivalinShinboneinastagecoach(asopposedtothetrain,whichsymbolizesthepresent-
      daycivilizationinFord’sfilm)asayounglawyer.OnthewaytoShinbone,aviolentband
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      865     
                                                             
                                                             
      ofevildoersledbyLibertyValanceattacksthestagecoach.Valanceisacharismaticbandit
      whoappliestheruleofthestrongestintheWildWest,representedasapre-politicalstate
      ofnature(Bo¨hnke2001;Brunkhorst2006).Valancerobs,beatsupStoddardandmocks
      him for possessing useless law books.                  
        ThestagecoachfinallyarrivesatShinbone.Thisremotesmalltownisrelatively safe
      duetotheequilibriumofforcesbetweentwoformidablegunmen–thecowboyDoniphon
      and the bandit Valance. As Doniphon observes: ‘Liberty Valance is the toughest man
      southofthePicketwire,nexttome.’19TheevilValanceandthevirtuousDoniphonarethe
      mirrorimageofeachother:twomenofactionequallyathomeinthelawlessWildWest.
      While Valance represents pure evil, Doniphon stands for unadulterated virtue and in-
      tegrity.OutsideofShinbone,Valancemakestherule.InShinbone,thegunmanDoniphon,
      not the sheriff, is the authority and limit to Valance’s violent power. For the much-
      respected Doniphon, life in a small town bustling with life is rewarding. He even en-
      tertains the prospect of a happy future with Hallie, the woman he loves.
        Nevertheless,Stoddard’scomingtoShinbonecausesagrowingcrisis.Thecivilizing
      hero’s arrival unsettles the existing balance of forces and the emerging love between
      Hallie and Doniphon.20 In the beginning, Stoddard has nothing left to his name after
      Valance’s attack apart from a few law books. He gets a menial job as a waiter and
      dishwasherinthekitchenofthelocalsaloon,wherehemeetsHallie.Healsoaimstosetup
      a law office. In a dialogue with Stoddard, Doniphon expresses his amusement at
      Stoddard’s law office and ironizes him:                
        “Doniphon: [In Peter Ericson’s kitchen visiting Hallie, sees Ransom Stoddard’s shingle,
        reads] ‘RansomStoddard, At’torney at Law’            
        Doniphon: You’re apersistentcuss, pilgrim.Youreally aim tohangthat upoutside?
        Stoddard: [defiant] That’s why Ipainted it.          
        Doniphon:Well,takesomeadvice,pilgrim.Youputthatthingup,you’llhavetodefendit
        with agun, andyouain’t exactly the type.”            
                                                             
        Stoddard, the ‘pilgrim’ – as Doniphon calls him using religious imagery – is on the
      missiontospreadthegoodnews:heteachesreading,writingandthefundamentalsoflaw
      and democracy to the people of Shinbone. Stoddard symbolizes the civilizing hero
      bringinglawanddemocraticprogresstotheWildWest.Hechampionstheruleoflawand
      the‘self-evidenttruths’ofequalityandjusticeagainsttheviolenceoftheruleofthegun.
        AmonghispupilsistheloyalPompey,Doniphon’sBlackaide.Inoneclassroomscene,
      Pompey, turned schoolmate, is quizzed about his knowledge of the US Declaration of
      Independence. This ironic scene points to the performative contradiction between the
      ‘self-evidenttruths’ofthenewrepublic(equality,universalrights)andreality,mainlythe
      exclusion of minorities such as the Black people represented by Pompey.21 In dialogue
      with Stoddard, an uneasy Pompey has problems remembering the new ‘self-evident
      truths’:                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      866                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image 1. Pompey inStoddard’sclass.                     
                                                             
                                                             
        “Pompey:Itwas writ byMr. ThomasJeffersonof Virginia. 
        Stoddard: Was written, Pompey.                       
        Pompey:WrittenbyMr.Thomas Jefferson. Andhecalled the Constitution.
                                                             
        Stoddard: Declarationof Independence.                
        Pompey:It begunwith the words ‘Wehold these truthsto be…’
                                                             
        Charlie (Aclassmate): Self-evident.                  
        Stoddard: Lethimalone, Charlie.                      
        Pompey:Self-evident, that... uhh...that...           
                                                             
        Stoddard: ‘Thatallmen arecreated equal.’That’s fine,Pompey.
        Pompey:I knew that,but I plumbforgotit.              
        Stoddard: …A lotof peopleforgetthat part of it. Youdid justfine,Pompey.”
                                                             
        Image 1 shows Pompey’s shadow reaching Abraham Lincoln’s portrait on the wall
      while Stoddard paternalistically cross-examines him. The image is a visual irony and
      metaphor: Pompey’s shadow on the portrait of the maximum representative of the new
      republicpointstothegapbetweenthepromiseoftheDeclarationofIndependenceandthe
      reality of inequality and exclusion.                   
        Stoddard is fully aware of this incongruity between principle and reality. As he
      observestoassuagePompeyandconveyabroadertruth,‘(a)lotofpeopleforgetthatpart
      ofit’,namelythat‘allmenarecreatedequal’.Nonetheless,thebrokendialoguebetween
      the teacher and pupil22 and the events unfolding convey an enduring contradiction.
      Stoddard, the civilizational hero, limits himself to teaching the ‘self-evident truths’ but
      doesnotactuponthem.HeneitherthematizesnorquestionstheracistexclusionofBlacks
      intheclassroomoroutside.Nordoeshemakepracticaladjustmentstocorrectit.Onthe
      contrary,whenhereturnstoShinboneasafamedandpowerfulstatesman,heperpetuates
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      867     
                                                             
                                                             
      Pompey’s invisibilisation andhumiliation by furtively slipping himsome dollars out of
      charity (see III. ii).23                               
        Inparallel,alovestoryaddsdramatismtothepoliticalplot.Thegood-willedHallie,
      who serves in the local saloon, comes under Stoddard’s spell. Although illiterate, she
      cravestoovercomeherignorance:‘Iknow—shesays—,theGoodBookfrompreacher
      talk;butit’dbeasoulcomfortifIcouldreadthewordsmyself’.Halliegraduallybecomes
      infatuated with Stoddard and his missionary zeal. She must choose between two men
      symbolizing opposite worlds, the Wild West and modernity, past and future.
        The tension is double – political and erotic – and the clash between the two worlds
      becomesimminent.Thepoliticalconflictintensifiesastheterritoryviesforstatehood,and
      StoddardisselectedasarepresentativeoverValance.Thegunsareoutinatensescenein
      the overcrowded local saloon that brings together all the protagonists. Outwitted by
      Doniphon and Pompey, Valance and his gang back off and leave the saloon. An open
      confrontation is avoided by a hair’s breadth. Doniphon asks ironically: ‘Well, now; I
      wonder what scared them off’? The local newspaper editor, Dutton Peabody, answers
      with another irony, poking fun at Stoddard’s preachy idealism: ‘You know what! The
      spectacle of law and order here, rising up from the gravy and the potatoes’.
        Stoddard’sdeclaredintentiontobringValancetojusticegenerateshilarityinShinbone
      duetotheincongruitybetweenhislegalzealandthelackofrealpower.Doniphonmocks
      him,yethealsoattemptstomediatebetweentherealityoftheWildWestandStoddard’s
      promiseofanewworld:hewantstoteachStoddardthewaysoftheforce–‘Iknowthose
      law books mean a lot to you’, Doniphon tells him, ‘but not out here. Out here, a man
      settleshisownproblems’.However,Doniphon’sattemptisafailure.Stoddarddoesmake
      anattempttolearnhowtousethegunbut,asusual,stopshalfway.Afterafirstmiscarried
      attempt, he refuses to continue to learn from Doniphon, proudly invoking his civiliza-
      tional mission contrary to the use of force (Image 2). 
        Stoddard’srefusalto learn symbolizesa broader problem: theidealist lawyer turns a
      blind eye to reality and the responsibility of the hard choices generated by his civi-
      lizationalmission.Despiterepeatedforewarnings,hefailstoacceptthattheinstitutionof
      law – that is, the foundation of the legal community – requires concrete force and au-
      thority (Image 3).                                     
        ValancewouldsoonconstrainStoddardtofacethisreality,leadinguptothefascinating
      climaxofFord’smovie(2.a.),whichsetsinmotionthenewdemocraticcommunity(2.b.).
      2. The climax: the duel and the two meanings of Doniphon’s symbolic death
      a. The duel and Doniphon’ssymbolic sacrifice. Liberty Valance initially ridicules Stoddard
      (whom he calls ‘dishwasher’), yet in time, he intuits the existential threat his civilizing
      mission poses. Valance directly challenges Stoddard: ‘You got a choice, dishwasher.
      Eitheryouleave,ortonightbeonthatstreetalone.Youbethere,anddon’tmakeuscome
      and get you’.                                          
        Heroicallyor,rather,recklessly,StoddardgoesoutofthesaloontoconfrontValancein
      agunduel.It’sameresuicidalact,giventhatStoddarddoesnotevenknowhowtoholda
      gun, let alone use it. Yet, against all reason and expectation, we see Stoddard shooting
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      868                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image 2. Doniphon’sfailedattempt toteach Stoddard to usethe gun.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image 3. The duel between Stoddard (the civilizinghero) andValance (the evilgunman).
                                                             
      down Valance. In this manner, he miraculously arises as a liberator of the people of
      Shinbone and their new hero: against all odds, the book seems to have triumphed over
      the gun.                                               
        Killing Valance is key to the possibility of founding the new republic, namely of
      substituting the logic of the enemy with the peaceful competition between political
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      869     
                                                             
                                                             
      adversaries. However, to extrapolate Derrida’s metaphor, a silence is walled up at the
      foundation. Hidden in darkness, Doniphon and not Stoddard shot and killed Valance.
      Moreover, Doniphon chooses to remain silent about it. This choice acquires different
      meaningsinFord’sstoryofloveandpoliticalchange.AsPippinhighlights,byshooting
      Valance from a dark corner and not in a face-to-face confrontation, Doniphon violates
      ‘everycodeoftheWest’(Pippin2011,80).Doniphonsacrificesbothhiscowboy’scodeof
      honourand‘privatepersona’–hishopeforahappylifewithHallie–outofselflesslove.
      Asheterselyjustifieshischoice:‘(c)old-bloodedmurder.ButIcanlivewithit.Hallie’s
      happy’.                                                
        Atthepoliticallevel,thesignificanceofDoniphon’skillingofValanceandsilenceover
      theshooter’sidentityisdouble,anditreferstothequestionsofmythmakingandviolence.
      First,thesilenceovertheshooter’sidentityrelatestomythmakingandauthority.24Ford’s
      insight is that the foundation of the legal community cannot be built on abstract legal
      rationality, as it requires authority and real force, namely legitimate power based on an
      inspiringnarrative.IncontrasttoStoddard,Doniphonassumesthatpassingfromthestate
      ofnaturetothecivilstaterequiresanactofforceaccompaniedbyanarrativeora‘moral
      story’(Lakoff2016).DoniphonmakesasymbolictransfertowardStoddardandthelaw
      bykeepingsilentoverthekiller’sidentity.Namely,heendowsthelawanditsmaximum
      representative with authority – with a quasi-mythical symbolic power and an inspiring
      story.25                                               
        Notably, in Ford’s vision, God and a sacred tradition are no longer the sources of
      symbolic power and public narrative that can mobilize people and generate allegiance.
      The authority based on narrative legitimation builds upon an immanent and secular
      miracle,26 that is, Stoddard’s prowess of killing Valance and defying all reason and
      expectation.                                           
        Second,DoniphonassumesthehardchoiceandaporeticresponsibilitythatStoddard
      shuns,namely,thatfoundingthelegalcommunityrequiresanextra-legalactofviolence
      (seeII).Ironically,Doniphon,thepersonificationoftheoldworld,hasamoreprofound
      knowledgeofthenewlawanditsinnerrelationtoforcethanStoddard,itsprophet.Onthe
      other hand, although Doniphon is the quintessential cowboy, his understanding goes
      beyondhisworldandidentitylimits.Doniphonisadialecticalfigure,27asitrepresentsat
      once the mythical hero of the Western genre and his negation. He is a selfless ‘anti-
      Western hero’, personifying the aporia of the foundation and exit from the state of
      nature–namely,thattheabolishmentofthelawofthegunisrealizedbymeansofagun.
      Thereby, Doniphon chooses to commit a symbolic suicide: he sacrifices his ‘public
      persona’tomakepossiblethebreakwiththecircularlogicofendlessviolenceoftheWild
      West (see also Pippin 2011).28                         
        Insum,throughhissilence,Doniphonmakesadoublesacrificethatamountstohisfirst
      ‘symbolicdeath’–hisdisappearancefromthecentrestagetogetherwiththeWildWest.29
      Doniphon becomes increasingly isolated and dies in extreme poverty and completely
      forgotten.Atthesametime,Stoddarttakesawaythewomanhelovesandleaveswithher
      for Washington in pursuit of a successful political career.
        Still,aswewillsee,Stoddard’sdoublesuccesswillhavedamagingeffects.While
      force and a ‘moral story’ are necessary for the passage to the new world, building

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      870                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      one’slifestoryandpoliticallegitimacyondeceitwillhaveahighpersonalandpublic
      cost (III).                                            
                                                             
      b. The beginnings of the new order. Notwithstanding the fundamental importance of
      killing Valance, the foundation of the new community is, in Ford’s representation, a
      processandnotanactordecisionencapsulatedinasinglemoment.Ford’sdepiction
      of the beginnings of the modern-democratic republic ruthlessly cuts through the
      triumphalist imagination of American progressivism. Not only is the political
      community born out of murder and deceit but also, evil, previously incarnated by
      Valance,morphsintomoresubtleandpervasiveforms.Thefoundationofdemocratic
      electoral politics is essentially shaped by circus populism, deceitful politicking and
      emotionalmanipulation,whichuncannilyresonatewithtrendsinpresent-daypolitics
      (UngureanuandPopartan2020).Symptomatically,atonepoint,duringthefounding
      Convention, a politician makes a show occupying the centre stage with a horse and
      performing spectacular lasso movements. The Election Council President shouts at
      him: ‘This is a convention, not a rodeo, Langhorne!’. However, in Ford’s repre-
      sentationofthefoundingdemocraticelections,thepeopleareafranticmobthrilledby
      the political show (Image 4).                          
        Asimilarcircusatmospheremarksthenewmassmediarepresentedbythedrunkard
      and clownish Dutton Peabody. Doniphon drily cuts through the verbiage and lack of
      integrity of the new press, a pillar of the new republic:
        “DuttonPeabody:[protestinghisnominationtothestatehoodconvention]No!Youdon’t!
        No!I’manewspaperman,notapolitician!No,politiciansaremymeat!-IbuildthemupandI
        tear them down…Icouldn’t beone…Give me...            
        Doniphon: Bar’s closed                               
        Peabody: Good people of Shinbone, I’m your conscience’ I’m the still, small voice that
        thundersinthenight,I’myourwatchdogthathowlsagainstthewolves...whatelseamI?
        Doniphon: Town drunk?”                               
                                                             
        In Ford’s cinematic representation, not Dutton Peabody, but Doniphon – the man of
      actionandfewwords–istheexemplaryvoiceofmoralconsciousnessandtruthfulness.
      When Pompey is refused a drink at the bar, Doniphon protests vehemently. Still, to no
      effect:despitetheegalitarian‘self-evidenttruths’professedinthepublicsphere,silence
      over exclusions is engrained in the foundational process. Ironically, Doniphon, the
      representative of the old order, is the only one who reacts against racial injustice and
      exclusion.                                             
        Theambivalentnatureofthefoundationofthepoliticalcommunityalsoemergesfrom
      acrucialbackstageencounterbetweenStoddardandDoniphonduringthefirstelections.
      Stoddard hesitates to enter politics, and he believes that he has murdered Valance, thus
      betrayed his principles. But his moral scruples are short-lived. Doniphon urges an un-
      decided Stoddard to fulfil what he has started:        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      871     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image4. Circuspopulismduringthefirstdemocraticelections:apoliticalcandidateonahorse
      performsforthe electorate.                             
        “Youtalktoomuch,thinktoomuch.Besides,Youdidn’tkillLibertyValance…Hallie’syour
        girlnow.Gobackinthereandtakethatnomination.Youtaughtherhowtoreadandwrite;
        now give hersomethingto readandwrite about!”         
                                                             
        Stoddard’s moral scruples accompany him only halfway: once again, he fails to act
      upontruth.FordpicturesStoddard’sambivalencemagisterially.Hisidealisticwillingness
      to sacrifice for his principles elicits approval and admiration. Despite the abysmal dis-
      proportion inskill andpower between him and Valance, Stoddard confronts him twice,
      puttinghislifeontheline.Andyet,Stoddardstopsshortofactingprincipally.30Forthe
      cowboy Doniphon, words and deeds are a perfect match; in contrast, for Stoddard, the
      symbolofthenewworld,wordsanddeedsceasetobealigned.Basedonalie,Stoddard
      enters the political campaign, begins a successful career and marries Hallie: a deceitful
      silence is walled up at the root of his successful political and personal life.
                                                             
      3. Denouement: legend, truth and damaged life          
      Stoddard’sflashbackends.Wearebackinthepresent,atDoniphon’sfuneral.Stoddardis
      keen on honouring Doniphon’s memory. He gets angry at the undertaker’s undignified
      treatment of Doniphon’s dead body:                     
                                                             
        “Stoddard: Wherearehis boots?                        
        Undertaker:Well,Ithought...well,theywasanawfulnicepairofboots,almostbrandnew,
        andI thought...                                      
                                                             
        Stoddard: Puthis boots on,Clute. Andhis gunbelt,andhisspurs.”
        Yet,Stoddardis,onceagain,ambivalent:atadeeperlevel,histreatmentofDoniphon’s
      is, once again, deeply ambivalent: while he claims respect for his dead body, Stoddard
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      872                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      burieshissymbolicbody,condemningittooblivion.Duringtheinterview,Stoddardtells
      Scott, the local newspaper editor, the truth about Doniphon’s being the real hero who
      killed Valance. But, quite remarkably, silencing truth and lying prevail once again. The
      journalistMaxwellScottpersuadesStoddardnottopublishthetruthbypronouncingthe
      movie’s most memorable line. Stoddard asks the journalist:
        “You’re notgoing to use thestory, Mr. Scott?         
                                                             
        MaxwellScott:No,sir.Thisisthewest,sir.Whenthelegendbecomesfact,printthelegend.”
        DoesFordholdupScott’sprivilegingthelegendoverthetruth?Accordingtoafirst
      interpretation, the answer is yes. As I’ve pointed out, in Pippin’s view, the Fordian
      vision draws attention to critical political-psychological insights, such as the crucial
      function of myths in the building affect and commitment necessary for community-
      building. In this sense, for Pippin, Ford’s movie provides a useful counterpoint to the
      public reason approach and democratic progressivism rooted in Enlightenment ratio-
      nalism. Political communities cannot be built on abstract rationality; only myths and
      legends can generate real allegiance. As Scott suggests (and Stoddard appears to ac-
      quiesce), myths and legends constitute essential building blocks of the political
      community.Intunewiththisinterpretativeline,Leutratobservesthat,inFord’svision,
      ‘(l)egendandfactsconstituteadevicewithdrawers(dispositifa` tiroirs);allalign,and
      the distinction fades without knowing where the facts are’ Leutrat 1997, apud Pippin
      2011, 170; my transl.                                  
        However,thisinterpretationisquestionable.Fordagainshowstheaudience‘wherethe
      facts are’, as he constructs a scene that ironically points to a movie’s core theme – the
      incongruitybetweenprincipleandreality.AftertellingDoniphon’struestorytorestorehis
      memory, Stoddard assents to Scott’s refusal to publish the truth in resigned silence.
      Certainly, the prestigious statesman Stoddard could have easily protested Scott’s stand,
      insisting on publishing it to honour his friend, who has passed away in misery and
      undeservedlyforgotten.However,onceagain,Stoddardstopshalfway.Hetellsthetruth
      but does not act upon it. His consenting silence in collusion with Scott amounts to
      Doniphon’s second symbolic death.                      
        As for Scott, he is unhesitant in maintaining and propagating a story by actively
      concealing the truth. His vindicatory reference to the West (‘This is the west, sir…’) to
      justifyhisstandisunwittinglyironicalashedoestheoppositeofwhatheclaimstodo:he
      givesupontheWestrepresentedbythetruthfulandvirtuousDoniphonbyappealingto
      theWestitself.Scottmaybeconcernedwiththeimportanceoflegendsandnarrativesfor
      inspiring and mobilizing people. However, building them on blatant lies is neither a
      fatality nor necessarily good for the community. Behind Scott’s aura of democratic
      respectability – he is the maximum representative of the local mass media – hides
      cynicism.Atleast Dutton Peabody,his predecessor, wasanauthentic, undisguised,and
      comical drunkard.                                      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      873     
                                                             
                                                             
        The legend has, in some sense, become fact. However, Ford shows how building
      realityaroundadeceitfulnarrativeisspuriousandhasperniciouseffects.Theperilsof
      the uncoupling of socio-political and personal life from truth become palpable by the
      movie’send.Thetwopromises–thesocio-politicalpromiseofemancipationbasedon
      ‘self-evident truths’ and the personal promise of love guiding Hallie’s choice – have
      fallenshort.Bracketingpublicandexistentialtruthsmaybringpracticalbenefitsinthe
      shortrun,asStoddardgetsthegirlandbecomesasuccessfulpolitician.Yet,inthelong
      run,Fordshowshowuntruthturnslifeintoanemptyshell:acommunitydisconnected
      from truth-telling turns into its shadow, and a life without truth is a misspent life. As
      Pippin nicely observes, ‘Everything in contemporary Shinbone is clean, very brightly
      lit, extraordinarily orderly, and, in a way, oddly still, almost dead, especially by
      comparison with earlier Shinbone’ (Pippin 2011, 72). Yet, Pippin does not extract the
      symbolic import of this contrast: decoupling public life from ‘living in truth’ turns
      Shinbone into a town that is ‘almost dead’. The new republic may be preferable for
      being peaceful and prosperous. Yet, it is based on ‘manufactured consent’,31 a klep-
      tocratic regime resulting from the collusion between political and mass media elites
      represented by Scott and Stoddard. Therefore, there is a continuity between the
      foundational process and post-foundational politics, past and present. The modern
      republic is scarred by different pathologies – populism, verbosity, deceit and
      exclusion–whichreplacethetruthfulness,integrityandactionrepresented mainly by
      the mythologized figure of Doniphon.                   
        Stoddard’sreunionwiththenow-agedPompeysupportsthisinterpretationfocusedon
      the contradiction between the promise of the ‘self-evident truths’ and reality. When
      meeting the now-old Pompey again, Stoddard expresses joy and appreciation. Yet,
      StoddardtreatsPompeyasaslave.ThesuccessfulpoliticiandemeansPompeythroughan
      undignified act of charity: hurriedly and furtively – as if feeling ashamed – Stoddard
      sneaks money (‘pork chop money’) into Pompey’s hand.   
        The figure of the dejected and old Black (Images 5 and 6) is the stain on the public
      celebration of democratic progress personified by Stoddard. In Ford’s deconstructive
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image 5. The aged Pompey nexttoDoniphon’scoffin.       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      874                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Image6. StoddardlookingatthemysteriouscactusflowersonDoniphon’scoffin.Hallie’scontrasting
      figureissymbolicallyplacedinthebackground.33           
                                                             
      cinematic gaze, the moment of foundation of the modern republic and the post-
      foundational modern society walls up another silence perpetuated in the post-
      foundational period: the exclusions behind the triumphalist smokescreen of the public
      discourse of progress.32                               
        Stoddard’s and Hallie’s personal lives are equally damaged: his enthusiastic mis-
      sionary progressivism has turned into the melancholy of a misspent life. A chasm ex-
      pressed by his tired, melancholic look has opened within himself. Another symbolic
      chasm has opened between him and Hallie.               
        TheHallieintuitsthetruth:thereisaclearsenseshefeelsdisillusionedatalllevels.She
      chosethefuture,butthingshavenotturnedoutaccordingtoStoddard’spromise.Atthe
      endofherlife,HallieisnowirremediablynostalgicforthetruthfulDoniphonandtheold
      Shinbone.InadialoguewithStoddard,sheconfessesthather‘roots’areinShinboneand
      that her ‘heart is here’.                              
        ThedepartureofStoddardandHalliefromShinboneismarkedbythestifledtension
      betweentheoptimisticpublicnarrative(progress,universalism)andreallife.Onthetrain
      (thesymbolofprogress),theenthusiasticJasonTully–theticketcontroller–expresses
      his admiration for the illustrious statesman Stoddard: ‘Nothing’s too good for The Man
      WhoShotLibertyValance’.Drawn-faced,inward-lookingandirremediablymelancholic,
      Stoddard acquiesces to the lie the third time.         
        Thislastscenehasanew-testamentaryring.LikePeterintheNewTestament,thewell-
      meantbutvacillatingStoddardconcealsthetruththreetimes.Yet,noGodcanreconcile
      him with his misspent life. He is a broken man. The communication with Hallie is ir-
      remediablydamaged.Herlifeisalsobrokenandripewithanuntoldregret:severedfrom
      truth, personal and public life ring equally hollow.   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      875     
                                                             
                                                             
      Conclusion                                             
      First,I’vesketchedanddefendedanaporeticperspectiveonthe‘mystical’foundationof
      the democratic community, which eschews both the democratic mythology of recon-
      ciliation(Habermas)andthehyperbolizationofparadoxes(Derrida).Second,I’veargued
      that Ford’s cinematic vision deconstructs the triumphalist American progressivism and
      resonateswiththeaporeticview.Inparticular,forphilosopherslikePippin,Ford’smovie
      provides a valuable counterpoint to democratic progressivism rooted in Enlightenment
      rationalism. From his standpoint, the Fordian vision draws attention to key political-
      psychologicalinsights,suchastheinstrumentalroleofmythsingeneratingtheemotion
      andcommitmentnecessaryforcommunity-building.Incontrast,I’vearguedthatFord’s
      movie makes manifest that, although a personaland socio-political life built on untruth
      can result in immediate success, it eventually turns out hollow and misspent: replacing
      truth-searchingwiththemythologizationofamereliecannotbutleadtoadamagedlife.
      Fromthisperspective,I’vearguedthatFordframesthejournalistScott’sfamouswords–
      ‘(w)hen the legend becomes fact, print the legend’ – critically as symptomatic of the
      contradictionbetweentherhetoricofdemocraticprogressivismandreality.Ford’smovie
      unveils that behind the noble rhetoric of equality, freedom and progress is the
      manufacturingofconsentbasedonthecomplicitybetweenmassmedia(representedby
      Scott) and the political elite (represented by Stoddard).
        Ford’s vision has blind spots and is also driven by a mythological fabulation. Im-
      portantly, it underplays the role of the people, women and different minorities in the
      historicaldynamicofthemodernrepublic’sfoundation.InFord’svision,thefoundational
      moment is the work of solitary individuals and not of the people. Ford relies on the
      gendered and individualistic myth of a perfect male hero at the expense of envisaging
      people as a collective force in the constitution and development of modern democratic
      society. The people do not organize to confront the evil – Valance and his band – and
      support the law. The people of Shinbone are represented as a multitude on the way to
      becomingemancipated,aswhentheylearnthealphabetandthefundamentalsoflawand
      democracyfromStoddard.Buttheynevergetthere:knowledgeandlearningdonotturn
      peopleintoanautonomousdemocraticforce.Infact,duringthefirstdemocraticelections,
      thepeopleofShinboneare,byandlarge,representedasarowdymob:thebeginningsof
      democracy are strikingly marked by circus populism, demagoguery and emotional
      manipulation. Likewise, once modern democracy has consolidated, the people are, in
      Ford’s film, an absent mass ruled over by mass media and the political elite. In this
      corrosivevision,themodernrepublicmaybepeacefulandprosperous;yet,itisportrayed
      as a kleptocracy – the rule of the lying word, a consensus manufactured by the elites.
        Ironically,Ford’scinematiccritiqueandconcernwith‘livingintruth’ismarkedbya
      mythologizing impulse.34 This impulse is fixated on the past: in particular, in The Man
      Who Shot Liberty Valance, he constructs an ideal past personified by Doniphon, the
      mythical individual hero for whom words and deeds are perfectly aligned. Notably,
      Habermas’ and Derrida’s concern with unconditional justice and truth are also marked
      by a mythologizing impulse. But, in contrast to Ford’s fixation on the past, this
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      876                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      mythologizing impulse is fixated on the future – consider Habermas’ vision of final
      reconciliation in mentis and Derrida’s messianism of the democracy ‘to come’.
        Finally,doesFord’smovieunmasktheemptinessofthedemocraticexperimentandits
      irremediable inabilitytoconnecttoatruthful life? Or doesitamplify itsdeviationsand
      pathologies to elicit a counter-reaction in the audience? The political significance of
      Ford’sdisenchantedandironicaldepictionofthedemocraticrepublicremains,Ibelieve,
      indeterminate. In a first interpretation, modern political life may be prosperous and
      peaceful, but it rings hollow. According to this reading, Ford’s movie forecloses the
      possibility of collective progress and democratic exemplarity. There remains only the
      solace of a golden past centred on the stereotypical myth of the cowboy hero – white,
      male, virtuous and solitary. In contrast, in a second reading, Ford’s movie magnifies
      democraticpathologiestogenerateareaction intheaudienceagainstsevering lifefrom
      truth and truthfulness. Be that as it may, the indeterminateness of the significance of
      Ford’spictureofmoderndemocraticpoliticsisultimatelyinstructive.Whetherdemocracy
      isanemptyshellorhassubstantivelifecannotbeansweredbyartisticorphilosophicalfiat
      butonly by theaudiences: itisthroughthepeople’sengagement insocietyandpolitics
      that democracy can be connected to truth-telling and inspiring narratives.35
      ORCID iD                                               
      CamilUngureanu https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8419-8111  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
       1. ByAmericandemocraticprogressivism,Idonotrefereithertoaspecifichistoricalperiodin
         U.S. history or to the contemporary liberal camp but, more broadly, to a future-oriented
         optimisticbeliefinmodernityandtechnology,democracyandinfiniteprogressthatisrootedin
         Enlightenment. As Pippin argues,‘the ideal of modernity, both in the official European En-
         lightenment sense (the authority of reason, science, tolerance, a faith in the social good of
         technologyandunregulatedmarkets)andinthegeneralculturalsenseofaprogressive,ever-
         improving people, is central – probably more than any other element – to what makes
         Americans who they are’ (Pippin 2011, 63). These key Enlightenment tenets allow for an
         analogywith Habermas’European versionof democratic progressivism. However,there are
         alsodifferences:Habermas’viewisnotindividualisticanddoesnotcelebratethefreemarket.
       2. For the sake of my argument, I distinguish between a traditional version of Enlightenment
         representedbyneo-KantianrationalistssuchasRawlsandHabermasandacriticalversionofit
         that grants a more central role to embodied narrative, emotion and (violent) exclusions in
         thinking aboutfoundations anddemocratic practice (see later).
       3. Toanticipate,thespecificmythattheheartofTheManWhoShotLibertyValanceisbuiltona
         consciouslie.Icannotenterherethecomplexitiesoftherelationshipbetweenothertypesof
         myths andfalsehood (Segal2015; Bottici2007;Flood2013).
       4. Myinterpretationiscompatiblewithandcomplementarytobiographical-historicalapproaches
         andaimstobroadenthediscussionaboutthecontinuingresonanceofFord’soperaaperta(II).
       5. ArendttakesthisphrasefromJean-JacquesRousseau’sTheSocialContract(1762/2018).In
         The Social Contract, Rousseau famously makes the first discussion of this aporia of
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      877     
                                                             
                                                             
         sovereignty.Sincethen,theaporiahasremainedablindspotofnormativepoliticalphilosophy
         (especially in the analytical tradition) and political science (for a critique of this double
         tendency,seeKraus 2021).                            
       6. In Political Theology, Schmitt dramatizes the foundational aporia in a decisionist view un-
         derpinnedbyanunderstandingofsovereigntyasa‘monopolyonthedecision’:thecreationof
         thepoliticalcommunityis,inanalogywithGod’screation,amiracle-like decisionexnihilo
         (Schmitt2006).SchmittispartofthebackgroundofthedebatebetweenHabermasandDerrida
         (Ungureanu2008).                                    
       7. Fortheaporiaoftheinfiniteregressoflegitimationintheabsenceofan‘ultimatefoundation’,
         seeMichelman (1997, 2001)andHabermas(2001,774).     
       8. Habermas uses interchangeably ‘contradiction’and‘paradox’ (2001,774).
       9. Habermas’pragmaticidealizationsinherenttolinguisticexchangesrepresentareinterpretation
         ofKant’sregulativeideas(Cooke1997;Ungureanu2008,2019a).Habermashasdilutedhis
         teleologicalviewintime(Habermas2003);yet,hehasnotabandoneditcompletely.Forthe
         copiousliteratureonHabermas,seeseeinteraliaWellmer1998,29-56;UngureanuandMonti
         2018).                                              
      10. ThereisavastliteratureonHabermasthatisdismissiveofhisabstractrationalism.WhereasI
         agreewithsomeofthiscriticism(Ungureanu2008;UngureanuandMonti2018),mypurpose
         goesintheoppositedirection,asIaimtoretrieveHabermas’keyconcernwiththevitallink
         between truthanddemocratic practice.                
      11. My purpose is not to caricature Habermas’ approach and unquestionable sensitivity to the
         tragedyof the refugees, butto point outsome problems of hisconceptual apparatus.
      12. This point is important both from the perspective of political philosophizing and the inter-
         pretationofTheManwhoKilledLibertyValance(seelater).InOnRevolution,Arendtargues
         that‘Theviciouscircleinlegislatingispresentnotinordinarylawmaking,butinlayingdown
         thefundamentallaw,thelawofthelandortheconstitutionwhich,fromthenon,issupposedto
         incarnatethe“higherlaw”fromwhichalllawsultimatelyderivetheirauthority’(Arendt1968,
         84). In contrast, I argue following Derrida that aporias are relevant also in times of post-
         foundational politics (see later).                  
      13. ThisisnottoclaimthatDerrida’sstandisSchmittian(forananalysis,seeUngureanu2008).
         However,itisarguablethatthereisanexaltationofdecisioninDerrida’sethicalanddemocratic
         thinking.                                           
      14. DerridainvokesinteraliaWittgenstein’sfamoususeofthe‘mystical’(Derrida1992,20)and
         thedistinctionbetween‘saying’(sagen)withrespecttoexistingfactsand‘showing’(zeichnen).
         InhisintroductiontotheTractatus,Wittgensteinstates:‘Thewholesenseofthebookmightbe
         summedupinthefollowingwords:whatcanbesaidatallcanbesaidclearly,andwhatwe
         cannottalkaboutwemustpassoverinsilence’(Wittgenstein1974,3).Derridadoesnotmakea
         categoricaldistinctionbetweensaying(usingthelanguage‘properly’,withrespecttofacts)and
         ethical and metaphysical matters that are ‘mystical’. In contrast to Wittgenstein, Derrida
         highlightsamystical‘silence’thatisconstitutivetothemoralpoliticalandlegalfacts.Further,
         the point is not to be silent about it, but to thematize it being aware of the limits of this
         enterprise.                                         
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      878                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      15. Not unlike Habermas, Derrida’s messianic view of the ‘democracy to come’ (Rosa`s Tosas
         2016)remainstributarytoamonotheisticimaginationanditsemphasison‘unconditionality’
         (Ungureanu2019a;from the copious literatureonDerrida, seeesp. Critchley 2014).
      16. ItisworthemphasizingthatthestructureoftheseaporiasisirreducibletoDerrida’smaster-
         aporia or ‘maddening paradox’ between finitude and infinity, conditionality and
         unconditionality.                                   
      17. TouseDerrida’sjargon,thepeopleare‘supplementary’withrespecttothelaw(seealsoHonig
         2001).                                              
      18. Politicalmythsarespecifictypesofnarratives.AsFloodarguesaboutpoliticalmyths:‘Itakeit
         thatmodernpoliticalmythsarenarrativesofpast,present,orpredictedpoliticaleventswhich
         their tellers seek to make intelligible and meaningful to their audiences. They relate stories
         whichcanoftenbegroupedinbroadlysimilarcategoriestothosewhichhavebeenappliedto
         the myths of traditional societies – such as stories of origins and foundings, stories of the
         exploitsofcultureheroes,storiesofrebirthorrenewal,andeschatologicalstories.Ingeneral,
         politicalmythsdonothavesacredstatusinsecularsocieties,buttheyneedtobeacceptedas
         fundamentally true by an identifiable group, whatever its size or constituency. In a manner
         analogous to sacred myth, they need to be transmitted and received as what Eliade calls
         exemplar history… Hence, they can have political functions broadly comparable to those
         served by the myths of traditional societies in relation to the distribution of power’ (Flood
         2013, 41)                                           
      19. James WarnerBellah andWillis Goldbeck arethe authors of the screenplay.
      20. Incontrasttothesocial-contractstoriesofThomasHobbesandJohnLocke,theequilibriumof
         thestateofnaturefallsapartbecauseofanexternalcause,thearrivaloftherepresentativeof
         the law.                                            
      21. AccordingtoAndre´Bazin(1971),theWesternsembodythe‘essenceofcinema’consistingin
         theconstructionofamythicconsciousnessoftheworld.Bazindoesnotdealeitherwiththe
         deconstructive aspects or the social-political problematic of Ford’s late movies.
      22. Pompey’s imperfect answers could be interpreted as Ford’s representing Black people as
         incapable.Butthisinterpretation is atoddswith Ford’s pointingtoPompey’s exclusionand
         mistreatmentthroughoutthemovie.True,however,Pompeyisnoble,braveandhonest,yetalso
         subordinate.                                        
      23. AsMcBrideobserves,Ford‘examinedtheshiftingboundariesbetweenhistoryandlegendand
         the ways that American ideals have been contradicted by historical fact, particularly where
         minority groupsareconcerned’ (McBride 2001; McBride2011).
      24. Here, I use ‘mystical’ by analogy and not strictly in the Derridean sense. However, (foun-
         dational) narratives of legitimation often hide or silence their particular origins and inter-
         pretationsunderauniversalisticorabsolutistlanguage(self-evidenttruths,theCreator,human
         rights, the people,the nation).                     
      25. In her essay ‘What is authority?’, Arendt categorically distinguishes authority from force/
         violence and persuasion through arguments. For Arendt, ‘(w)here arguments are used,
         authorityisleftinabeyance’(Arendt1968,133).Ipursueadifferentlineofargumentation,
         which takes a more dynamic approach to the complexities of the relationship between
         authority, force and persuasion. This aspect is ignored by Stoddard and minimized by the
         public reason approach (Habermas, Rawls): building authority as legitimate power and

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      879     
                                                             
                                                             
         allegiancerequiresanarrativethatinspiresandgeneratesaffectandcommitment,notmerely
         abstract legal rationality.                         
      26. Moreover, as Arendt points out, in modern and plural democracies where an absolute tran-
         scendentGrund(God;asacredtradition)isunavailable,thequestionofthelegitimationofthe
         actoffoundationbecomesimmanenttothepoliticalenterpriseitself(Arendt,1965,199;butsee
         Derrida,1986;Honig1991).ThisoccursinFord’sparableofthe‘secondfoundation’,thatis,
         the conquest of the Wild West: the foundation occurs without the appeal to God/a sacred
         tradition;theimmanentmiracleatthefoundationisStoddard’sunexpectedvictoryoverValance
         (seelater).Itis,however,noteworthythatTheUSDeclarationofIndependence(1776)appeals
         toabsolutes(‘self-evidenttruths’;the‘Creator’).SeeDerrida(1986)andHonig(1991)fora
         discussion.                                         
      27. I thank ananonymousreviewer for thiswording.       
      28. PippinmakestheinterestingpointthatDoniphonhidestheidentityoftheshootertoendthe
         cycleofviolentrevenge.AsPippinnicelyargues:‘apparently,avictoryoverLibertyValance
         (overunconstrained‘liberty’asanabsolute‘value’)byTomDoniphonwouldjustbeonemore
         episode in a cycle of violence, revenge, and intimidation. Valance must be killed by a rep-
         resentative of aneworder; his deathmustmeanthat’ (Pippin 2011, 81).
      29. Yearslater,inGranTorino(dir.ClintEastwood2008),aselflessex-soldier(playedbyClint
         Eastwoodhimself)aimstoovercomethecircularlogicofviolenceaswell,butdifferently:the
         memorableprotagonistofGranTorinoisaChrist-likefigurewhorefusestouseviolence(the
         gun)andacceptshisdeath:thesymbolicpowerofhissacrificialdeathismeanttointerruptthe
         circle of violence (Ungureanu 2020). In contrast, in The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance,
         Doniphoninterruptsviolentlythelogicofviolence:far offfromtheChristianimaginary,he
         doesnot giveuphis lifebut kills the enemy.          
      30. Brunkhorst argues that Stoddard is self-sacrificial as well (2006). There is bravery or reck-
         lessnessinStoddard’sbehaviour.However,hebuildshislifeonalie,notonself-sacrifice.In
         thissense, there isasubstantial difference between himandDoniphon.
      31. I borrowthe phrasefrom Herman andChomsky(1988).    
      32. In interpreting Doniphon’s extra-legal violence as a foundational moment of the legal com-
         munity,Pippindeniesitsparadoxicalnature.Hestatesthat‘(v)iolencebeforethereislawis
         unavoidably lawless, but if it is for the sake of law, the paradox can be lessened if not
         eliminated’ (Pippin 2011, 81-82). But he assumes that violence is external to the law and a
         temporarymeansforsettingupthelegalsystem.Ithinkthisinterpretationisphilosophically
         unpersuasiveanddoesnotdojusticetothedifferentaspectsofFord’sdeconstructionofthe
         foundationalprocess.Pippin’sreadingoverlooksthe‘interpretativeforce’(Derrida,seesupra)
         of the law, its blind spots, exclusions and biases. As Derrida underscores, physical, psy-
         chological, and symbolic violence is internal to and in tension with the self-correcting de-
         velopmentofthelegal-democraticprocess.Moreover,ifwetakeabroaderapproachtoFord’s
         cinematic vision, violence, evil and exclusions are not opposed to the ‘law’ of the new
         community.Evenifinmorediffuseways,theyareinscribedinthefoundationalprocessandthe
         post-foundationaldemocraticpolitics.Toillustrate,FordshowshowtheexclusionoftheAfro-
         American community represented by Pompey is silenced in the foundation of the political
         community and the post-foundational democratic politics. This forceful exclusion is not ab-
         stract butis aform ofstructural violence that damageslives.

[PAGE 28]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      880                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      33. Thecactusroseisthesymbolofthe‘rosebud’,thatis,whichwasgoodandauthenticinthepast,
         as opposedto apresent ofbroken promises(Sarris 1962,1975).
      34. Thisphraseis Va´clav Havel’s trademark (Keane 2000). I borrowit freely fromhim.
      35. IamgratefultoMihaelaMihai,MigueldeBeistegui,PeterKraus,andPabloMuñozCarmona
         for their commentsonanearlier version of thisarticle. All interpretiveerrors aremine.
      References                                             
                                                             
      Arendt, Hannah.1965. OnRevolution.NewYork: Viking Press.
      Arendt, Hannah.1968. Between PastandFuture. NewYork:VikingPress.
      Bazin,Andre´.1971. What IsCinema,Vol.2.Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Bogdanovich,Peter.1967. JohnFord.Berkeley:University ofCalifornia Press.
      Bo¨hnke,Michael.2001.“MythandLawintheFilmsofJohnFord.”JournalofLawandSociety28,
         no.1: 47–63.                                        
      Bordwell,David,JanetStaiger,andKristinThompson.1988.TheClassicalHollywoodCinema:
         FilmStyle andModeof Production to 1960.London: Routledge.
      Bottici, Chiara. 2007.APhilosophy ofPolitical Myth.Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
      Bradatan, Costica, and Camil Ungureanu. 2014 (eds). Religion in the Contemporary European
         Cinema: the PostecularConstellation.NewYork: Routledge.
      Bradatan,Costica,andCamilUngureanu.2016(eds).CinemaandSacrifice.NewYork:Routledge.
      Brunkhorst, Hauke. 2006. “The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance— Von der rachenden zur revo-
         lutiona¨renGewalt.”Paragrana:InternationaleZeitschriftfürHistorischeAnthropologie15,
         no.1: 159–67.                                       
      Crithley, Simon. 2014. The Ethics of Deconstruction: Derrida and Levinas, 3rd revised ed. Ed-
         inburgh: EdinburghUniversity Press.                 
      Capdevilla,Pol.2023.Desaf´ıosdeltiempo.Este´ticadeltiempohistóricoenelartecontempora´neo,
         Barcelona,Gedisa (forthcoming).                     
      Cooke,Maeve.1997. LanguageandReason: AStudy.Cambridge, MA:MITPress.
      Derrida, Jacques. 1986.“Declarations of Independence.”NewPolitical Science7, no.1: 7–15.
      Derrida,Jacques.1992.“ForceofLaw.”InDeconstructionandthePossibilityofJustice,editedby
         DrucillaCornell,MichaelRosenfeld,andDavidGrayCarlson,3–67.NewYork:Routledge.
      Derrida, Jacques. 2005.Rogues.Stanford: Stanford University Press.
      Eagleman, Brian.2017. TheBrain. TheStory of you.NewYork: Vintage.
      Ferrara, Alessandro. 2001. “Of Boats and Principles, Reflections on Habermas’ ‘Constitutional
         Democracy’.”PoliticalTheory 26,no. 6:33–56.         
      Flood,Christopher G.2013. PoliticalMyth.LondonandNew York: Routledge.
      Gallagher, Tom. 1988. John Ford: The Man and His Films. Berkeley: University of California
         Press.                                              
      Habermas,Jürgen. 1996.Between Facts andNorms.Massachussets: MITPress.
      Habermas,J.2001.“ConstitutionalDemocracy:AParadoxicalUnionofContradictoryPrinciples?”
         Political Theory29,no. 6:3–20.                      
      Habermas,Jürgen. 2003.Truth andJustification.Cambridge: Polity.
      Herman, Edward S., and Chomsky, Noam. 1988. Manufacturing Consent. New York: Pantheon
         Books.                                              
                                                             

[PAGE 29]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ungureanu                                      881     
                                                             
                                                             
      Honig, Bonie. 1991. “Declarations of Independence: Arendt and Derrida on the Problem of
         FoundingaRepublic.”TheAmerican Political ScienceReview 85, no.1: 97–113.
      Honig, Bonie. 2001. “Dead Rights, Live Futures. A Reply to Habermas’ ‘Constitutional De-
         mocracy’.”Political Theory26,no. 6:31–50.           
      Hustvedt,Siri. 2012.Living, Thinking,Looking: Essays.New York: Picador Paper.
      Keane,John.2000. Va´clavHavel: APolitical Tragedyin Six Acts.New York: BasicBooks.
      Kraus, Peter. 2021. “Popular Republicanism versus Populism: Articulating the People.” Social
         Sciences10, no.366: 1–16.                           
      Lakoff,George.2016.MoralPolitics:HowLiberalsandConservativesThink.3rded.Chicago:The
         University of ChicagoPress.                         
      Leutrat, Jean-Louis. 1997. L’Homme qui tua Liberty Valance: John Ford, E´tude critique. Paris:
         E´dition Nathan.                                    
      Llevadot, Laura.2020.Jacques Derrida:Democracia ysoberan´ıa.Barcelona: Gedisa.
      Mcbride, Joseph. 2001. The Convoluted Politics of John Ford. Los Angeles Times. https://www.
         latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2001-jun-03-tm-5876-story.html
      McBride,Joseph. 2011. Searching forJohnFord.Jackson: University PressofMississippi.
      Michelman, Frank. 1997. “How Can Ever People Make the Laws? A Critique of Deliberative
         Democracy.”InDeliberativeDemocracy,editedbyBohmanJames,andWilliamRehg,34–50.
         Cambridge: MITPress.                                
      Michelman,Frank.2001.“ConstitutionalLegitimationforPoliticalActs.”ModernLawReview66,
         no.1: 1–15.                                         
      Mihai, Mihaela. 2022. Political Memory and the Aesthetics of Care: The Art of Complicity and
         Resistance.Stanford: StanfordUniversity Press.      
      Mulhall, Stephen.2016. OnFilm.3rd ed. Abingdon,Oxon:Routledge.
      Nussbaum,Martha.1992.Love’sKnowledge:EssaysonPhilosophyandLiterature.Oxford:Oxford
         University Press.                                   
      OchoaEspecho,Paulina.2011.TheTimeofPopularSovereignty.ProcessandtheDemocraticState.
         University Park, PA,USA:The PennsylvaniaUniversity Press.
      P´ıaLara,Maria.2020.BeyondthePublicSphere:FilmandtheFeministImaginary.Evanston,IL:
         Northwestern University Press.                      
      Pippin, Robert B. 2011. Hollywood Westerns and American Myth: The Importance of Howard
         Hawks andJohnFord for PoliticalPhilosophy.New Haven,CT: Yale University Press.
      Pippin,RobertB.2020.FilmedThoughtCinemaasReflectiveForm.Chicago:ChicagoUniversity
         Press.                                              
      Rancière, Jacques. 2009.TheFutureofthe Image.London: Verso Books.
      Rawls,John.1971. ATheoryof Justice.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
      Rosa`s Tosas, Mar.2016. Mesianismoenla filosof´ıa contempora´nea. Barcelona:Herder.
      Renan, Ernest. 2015. What Is a Nation? And Other Political Writings. New York, NY, USA:
         Columbia University Press.                          
      Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 2018.‘The Social Contract’ and Other Later Political Writings. Cam-
         bridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.                  
      Ruiz, Collantes, and Xavier, F. 2019. La construcción del relato pol´ıtico. Crear historias para
         ganarvotos.Barcelona:ThePublishingHouseoftheAutonomousUniversityofBarcelona(in
         Spanish).                                           

[PAGE 30]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      882                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      Sarris,Andrew.1962.“CactusRosebud,orTheManWhoShotLibertyValance.”FilmCulture5,
         no.1: 23–40.                                        
      Sarris,Andrew.1975. TheJohnFordMovie Mystery.Bloomington: IndianaUniversity Press.
      Schmitt,Carl.2006.PoliticalTheology:FourChaptersontheConceptofSovereignty.Chicago:
         CicagoUniversity Press.                             
      Scruton,Roger.2002. TheMeaningof Conservatism.Chicago, USA:St.Augustines Press.
      Segal,Robert. 2015. Myth: AVeryShort Introduction.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Sen, Amartya. 2009. The Idea of Justice, Cambridge, Massachussetts: The Belknap Press of
         Harvard University Press.                           
      SerranoZamora,J.2021.DemocratizationandStrugglesAgainstInjustice.APragmatistApproach
         to the Epistemic Practices of Social Movements. London and New York: Rowman and
         Littlefield International.                          
      Shiller,RobertJ.2019.NarrativeEconomics:HowStoriesGoViralandDriveMajorEconomic
         Events.Princeton: PrincetonUniversity Press.        
      Sirczuk,Mat´ıas.2018.FundaciónyLegitimidadenlaModernidadPol´ıtica:CarlSchmitt,Hannah
         Arendt yClaudeLefort.BuenosAires: Prometeo.         
      Smith,Kyle.2018.“ThePoliticsofJohnFord’sCinema”.TheNationalReview.Availableonline
         https://www.nationalreview.com/2018/01/john-ford-cinema-left-right-leaning-politics/
      Studlar, Gaylyn, and Matthew Bernstein (eds). 2001. John Ford Made Westerns. Filming the
         Legendin the SoundEra. Indiana: IndianaUniversity Press.
      Taylor,Charles.1989.SourcesoftheSelf.TheMakingoftheModernIdentity.Harvard:Harvard
         University Press.                                   
      Ungureanu,Camil.2008.“DerridaonDecision:BetweenHabermas’DiscursivismandSchmitt’s
         Decisionism.”Journal ofPolitical Philosophy16, no.3: 293–25.
      Ungureanu,Camil. 2013.“Derrida’s TenseBow.”TheEuropeanLegacy 18,no. 6:727–39.
      Ungureanu,Camil,andIvanSerrano.2018.“PopulismocomoRelatoylaCrisisdelaDemocracia
         Representativa.”The CIDOB Journalof International Affairs119: 13–33.
      Ungureanu,Camil.2019a.“JacquesDerridaonReligionandUniversalizingFaith.”Journalforthe
         Study ofReligions andIdeologies 18, no.54: 18–32.   
      Ungureanu,Camil.2019b.“PhilosophyofHistory.”InTheCambridgeHabermas-Lexicon,edited
         byAmyAllen, andEduardo Mendieta,296–99. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
      Ungureanu,Camil.2020.CineyPol´ıtica:UnaInmersiónRa´pida.Barcelona:TibidaboEditions(in
         Spanish).                                           
      Ungureanu,Camil,andAlexandraPopartan.2020.“PopulismasNarrative,Myth-Making,andthe
         “Logic”ofPoliticalEmotions.”JournaloftheBritishAcademy8,no.(s1):37–43.https://doi.
         org/10.5871/jba/008s1.037                           
      Ungureanu, Camil, and Monti, Paolo. 2018. Contemporary Political Philosophy and Religion.
         London:Routledge.                                   
      Wellmer, Albrecht. 1998. “The Debate About Truth: Pragmatism Without Regulative Ideas.”
         CriticalHorizons 4,no.1: 29–56.                     
      Wittgenstein,Ludwig.1974.TractatusLogico-philosophicus.London:RoutledgeandKeganPaul.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             