[PAGE 1]
1054122                                                      
research-article2021 TCS0010.1177_02632764211030550Theory, Culture & SocietyYoneyama
                                                             
                                                             
        GArlotibcalel Public Life                            
                                            Theory, Culture & Society
        Miyazaki   Hayao’s                  2021, Vol. 38(7-8) 251 –266
                                              © The Author(s) 2021
        Animism    and  the                                  
                                        https://doi.org/10A.1r1t7ic7l/e0 2r6e3u2s7e6 4g2u1id10e3li0n5e5s0:
        Anthropocene                     sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI: 10.1177/02632764211030550
                                           journals.sagepub.com/home/tcs
        Shoko Yoneyama                                       
        Universityof Adelaide                                
                                                             
        Abstract                                             
        The need for a reconsideration of human-nature relationships has been widely
        recognized in the Anthropocene. It is difficult to rethink, however, because there
        isacrisisofimaginationthatisdeeplyentrenchedwithinthefundamentalpremisesof
        modernity.Thisarticleexploreshow‘criticalanimism’developedbyMiyazakiHayao
        ofStudioGhiblicanaddressthispaucityofimaginationbyprovidingalternativeways
        of knowing and being. ‘Critical animism’ emerged from the fusion of a critique of
        modernity with informal cultural heritage in Japan. It is a philosophy that perceives
        natureasanon-dualisticcombinationofthelife-worldandthespiritual-world,while
        also emphasizing the significance of place. Miyazaki’s critical animism challenges
        anthropocentrism, secularism, Eurocentrism, as well as dualism. It may be the ‘per-
        fect story’ that could disrupt the existing paradigm, offering a promise to rethink
        human-nonhuman relationships and envisaging a new paradigm for the social
        sciences.                                            
        Keywords                                             
        animism, Anthropocene, climate change, human-nature relationship, Minamata,
        Miyazaki Hayao, Studio Ghibli                        
                                                             
                                                             
        Introduction                                         
        InTheGreatDerangement: ClimateChangeandtheUnthinkable, Amitav
        Ghosh(2016)contendsthatourinabilitytorespondtotheclimatecrisisin
        a fundamental way goes hand-in-hand with a crisis of imagination and
        culture,whichstemsfromthesamelimitations(epistemologicalandonto-
        logical) that underlie modernity. In order to bring about a fundamental
        change, ‘we need stories (and theories) that are just big enough to gather
        up the complexities and keep the edges open and greedy for surprising
        new and old connections’, as Donna Haraway (2015: 160) writes.
                                                             
                                                             
        Correspondingauthor:ShokoYoneyama.Email:shoko.yoneyama@adelaide.edu.au
        TCSOnlineForum:https://www.theoryculturesociety.org/ 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
      2252                          TheTohreyo, rCyu,lCtuurletu &re S&ocSieotcyi e3ty8(07(-08))
                                                             
                                                             
        In this article, I propose that the animism presented by Miyazaki
      Hayao of Studio Ghibli opens a new perspective on responding to the
      climate crisis and the Anthropocene. Miyazaki is acknowledged globally
      for his animation films, most notably Spirited Away (2001), which
      received an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature in 2003. The
      globalpopularityofhisworkisunquestionable.StudioGhiblifilmshave
      beendistributedworldwidethroughDisneysince1996andthestreaming
      of Ghibli films by Netflix and HBD Max in 2020 is expected to elevate
      the global exposure of his films even further. It could be said that
      Miyazaki Hayao is a cultural icon of our time.         
        This paper argues that Miyazaki’s films provide stories and images of
      animism which help us not only to rethink human-nature relationships
      but also to open up our imagination to envisage a new direction in the
      paradigmofthesocialsciencesinthisageoftheAnthropocene.Animism
      may be defined as a diverse philosophy of nature, which conceives of the
      spiritual world in nature as the source of universal life; and further, to
      foreshadow my discussion below of Miyazaki’s understanding of ani-
      mism, it rests upon the non-dualistic premise of the oneness of life,
      nature, and spirit/soul (tamashii).                    
        Although there have been attempts to clarify the theoretical signifi-
      cance of Miyazaki’s work in relation to climate change (Pan, 2020),
      scholarly exploration of his work from the viewpoint of animism is lim-
      ited (see Jensen and Blok, 2013; Ogihara-Schuck, 2014; Thomas, 2019;
      Yoneyama, 2019, 2020). This might be because it is difficult to deal with
      animism within the existing dominant paradigm of the social sciences, as
      I explore in detail below. Nevertheless, Miyazaki’s films are enormously
      popular and have a very wide appeal that transcends cultural and age
      barriers (Pan, 2020). By presenting animism in a way that attracts mil-
      lionsofpeoplearoundtheworld,doMiyazaki’sfilmsprovidearesponse
      to Ghosh’s crisis of imagination and crisis of culture?
        In order to explore this thesis, I address three questions: 1) What are
      the key features of Miyazaki Hayao’s animism, which I call critical ani-
      mism in this article? 2) How does his animism differ from ‘classical ani-
      mism’ and ‘new animism’? 3) What is the theoretical significance of
      Miyazaki’s animism? By addressing these questions, I argue that there
      is a potential for Miyazaki’s animism to interrogate and disrupt the fun-
      damentalassumptionsofmodernityandthesocialsciences, andthatthis
      enables us to start envisaging a new direction in the paradigm of the
      social sciences.                                       
      Miyazaki Hayao’s Animism                               
      Animism is the most important tenet of Miyazaki’s signature films,
      including Spirited Away, Nausicaa¨ of the Valley of the Wind (1984), My
      Neighbour Totoro (1988), Princess Mononoke (1997), and Ponyo (2008).
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
        YYoonneeyyaammaa                             2533    
                                                             
                                                             
        The significance of animism in these films is widely recognized by
        researchers (e.g. Ogihara-Schuck, 2014; Jensen and Blok, 2013;
        Harvey, 2015; Mumcu and Yilmaz, 2018; Yoneyama, 2019, 2020), as
        well as by fans. Miyazaki himself states that he established his philoso-
        phy of animism in the 12 years (1982–94) he worked on the manga ver-
        sion of Nausicaa¨ of the Valley of the Wind (hereafter Nausicaa¨), an epic
        story of over 1000 pages, which formed the foundation of Princess
        Mononoke where the human-nature relationship is the central theme
        (Miyazaki, 1996: 341). In his words, he seriously believes that ‘animism
        will be an important philosophy for humanity in the 21st century’
        (Miyazaki, 2013: 199) because it can address profound scepticism
        about modern civilization (Miyazaki, 2008a: 339), limitations to the
        materialistic aspects of human society (Miyazaki, 1996: 107), and the
        poor condition of the earth (Miyazaki, 2013: 232), and thus respond to
        changing views of the universe and the earth (Miyazaki, 2013: 314).
          Miyazaki’s animism has three key components. The first is his exten-
        sive and beautiful depiction of nature endowed with agency (Miyazaki,
        2008a: 90; Napier, 2018), which reflects and emphasizes the voices he
        gives to nature. Perhaps the most illuminative representation of this
        agency is the kodama, the numerous spirit-like beings that appear in
        Princess Mononoke. They express ‘‘‘something unseen’’ that exists in
        the forest, symbolising the spiritual-world in nature’ (Miyazaki, 1996:
        359).By‘somethingunseen’,Miyazakiisnotreferringtoso-calledsuper-
        natural phenomena but to life itself in nature (Miyazaki, 2008a: 82). To
        perceiveinnaturenotonlythespiritualworldbutalsousuallyunseenlife
        isatthecoreofthedefinitionofanimism,aswillbediscussedinthenext
        section. Miyazaki’s animism is well articulated in the words of Nausicaa¨
        in the manga version of Nausicaa¨ (Miyazaki, 2013: 199). At the end of
        the story, confronted with a monotheistic God-like figure, Nausicaa¨
        shouts: ‘A life is a life, regardless of how it comes into being. [...]
        Every life form, no matter how small, contains the outside universe
        within its internal universe’ (Miyazaki, 2012: vol. 2, 443); and ‘our god
        inhabits even a single leaf and the smallest insects’ (Miyazaki, 2012: vol.
        2, 518). These lines crystallize Miyazaki’s animism based on the oneness
        of life, nature, and spirit/soul (tamashii) (Yoneyama, 2019: 159–204).
          The second key component of Miyazaki’s animism derives from his
        position in the historical and political context of Japan, especially in
        relation to Shinto. Shinto is a sophisticated example of animism
        (Clammer, 2004: 102) where kami represent a spiritual and vitalistic
        force in nature. In Japan, however, ‘images of nature have played a
        particularly central role in moulding the imagery of nationhood’
        (Morris-Suzuki, 1998: 35), and the concept of animism has been
        ‘widely used as a way of explaining the distinctiveness of the national
        culture’ and its putative superiority (Clammer, 2004: 83). As such, the
        discourseonanimismhasoftenhadpoliticalandideologicalimplications

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
      2454                          ThTeohreyo, rCy,uCltuurlteu r&e S&ocSieotcyie 3ty8(07(-08))
                                                             
                                                             
      with strong jingoistic and orientalist colours (see Umehara, 1989,
      Yasuda, 2006, for instance, and my critique of nationalistic animism in
      Yoneyama, 2019: 17–28). This aspect of animism in Japan is closely
      linked to Shinto as a state ideology (the modern institutional aspect of
      Shinto). Miyazaki’s ‘challenge’ has been how to distance himself from
      state animism and convey his animism without being misunderstood as
      beingpartofthenationalisticdiscourseof‘Japaneseanimism’,sothathe
      can‘re-enchanthisaudienceswithasenseofspirituality thateschewsthe
      dogmas and orthodoxies of organised religions and politics’ (Wright,
      2005: n.p.; see also Reitan, 2017).                    
        Miyazaki’s animism instead reflects what UNESCO defines as the
      often ‘intangible cultural heritage’ that exists in diverse forms of folk
      belief (UNESCO, n.d.). A critical element distinguishing Shinto as
      state ideology and Shinto as intangible cultural heritage is the signifi-
      cance of the local and place in the latter. As pointed out by Clammer,
      animismis‘intenselylocal’(2004:95),asitisaboutthedirectconnection
      between people and the numinous power of a particular place. The dis-
      tinction between the two kinds of Shinto is most sharply demonstrated
      by the Meiji era’s 1906 Imperial Ordinance, which enforced the destruc-
      tion of small village shrines to configure bigger shrines as the adminis-
      trative and ideological apparatus of the modern state. Miyazaki clearly
      disassociateshimselffromideologicalaspectsofShinto.Hestatesthat:‘I
      don’tgotoworshipatashrineatNewYear’s.It’sbecauseIcan’tbelieve
      thatthegodsareinsidethosegaudyshrines’(Miyazaki,1996:360).Thus,
      shrines that appear in his films are local shrines, which are humble and
      decoration-free, and very much a part of nature, like the one in My
      Neighbour Totoro.                                      
        The third key component of Miyazaki’s animism is his negation of
      dualism,orcritiqueofwhatValPlumwoodcallsthe‘hyperseparation’of
      Western binaries (cited in Rose, 2013: 94). What is often misunderstood
      as ‘moral ambiguity’ between ‘good and evil’ by Western viewers
      schooledindualismactuallystemsfromMiyazaki’snegationofbinaries.
      Thus,Miyazaki’sdepictionsof‘goodandevil’(Napier,2006)and‘purity
      and pollution’ (Wright, 2005) are the result of his deliberate challenge to
      the dualistic view of the world (see also Reinders, 2016). His negation of
      binaries is again best articulated by the manga version of Nausicaa¨.
      In this story, Miyazaki challenges all sorts of dichotomies such as
      human:nature, life:death, spiritual:material, poisonous:poisoned, natur-
      al:human-made,eater:eaten,seen:unseen,andlight:dark.Hisnegationof
      dualism confronts readers most powerfully at the end of the story when
      Nausicaa¨ noticesthatthe‘blueblood’oftheOhmu,agiantinsectwhich,
      until that point, appears to represent the ‘ultimate good’, is actually
      shared by the Crypt of Shuwa, the ‘ultimate evil’. Underlining this is
      Miyazaki’s philosophy of the negation of dichotomy which he presents
      inthewordsofOhmu–‘oneinallandallinone’–andthatresonatewith

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
        Yoneyama                                      5      
        Yoneyama                                     255     
                                                             
        esoteric Zen Buddhism (Yoneyama, 2019: 183–91). Where then does
        Miyazaki’s animism belong theoretically in relation to scholarly dis-
        courses on animism?                                  
                                                             
        Classic Animism and New Animism                      
                                                             
        Miyazakiisnotaloneinpresentingacritiqueofdualism,albeitindirectly
        through the medium of animation films. The Cartesian human-nature
        dichotomy has been critiqued especially since the 1990s (e.g. Haraway,
        1991; Latour, 1993; Descola and Palsson, 1996), both generally in post-
        modern scholarship and specifically by ‘new animism’, academic bodies
        of work that surfaced around the turn of the 21st century, which postu-
        lated, inter alia, that ‘the Enlightenment distinction between Nature and
        Societyisobsolete’(Hornborg,2015a:57;seealsoMorrison,2015).With
        ever-intensifying environmental problems and climate change, even the
        biblical foundation of the binary human-nature relationship was called
        into question by the Vatican (Pope Francis, 2015).   
          Rethinking the human-nature dichotomy, however, is not easy
        because human-nature dualism is a ‘western-based cultural formation
        going back thousands of years’ (Plumwood, 2015: 445). It sees the
        human as not only entirely separate from but superior to the nonhuman
        because human essence is thought to be ‘the higher disembodied element
        of mind, reason, culture and soul or spirit’ (Plumwood, 2015: 445). By
        positioning humans above the natural world, this human-nature binary
        justifies using thenonhuman (i.e. nature) as a mereresource forhumans.
        Human-nature dualism is thus coupled with anthropocentrism.
          One scholarly trend that offers a radical critique of the human-nature
        binary, and anthropocentrism as its corollary, is ‘new animism’. It is
        called ‘new’ to differentiate it from the classic animism of Edward
        Tylor, who established animism as an anthropological term in 1871 in
        Primitive Culture. After surveying the literature on various kinds of ani-
        mism around the world, Tylor concluded that, although there is ‘endless
        diversity of detail’, animism is essentially ‘a philosophy of nature’
        whereby nature is seen to be pervaded with spiritual beings (or souls),
        which in turn are considered as the source of ‘universal life’ (1871: 184–
        5). Based on this, animism can be defined as: a diverse philosophy of
        nature, which locates the spiritual world both in nature and as the source
        of universal life. Miyazaki’s perception that nature is pervaded with
        something unseen and that something unseen is life itself is congruent
        with this definition of animism.                     
          Although the definition of animism has diverged little from the
        Tylorian definition for more than a century (Bird-David, 1999: S67),
        the evaluation of animism has changed completely in new animism. In
        her seminal paper ‘‘‘Animism’’ Revisited’, Nurit Bird-David (1999) pre-
        sentedacritiqueofanimismbyTylorandhisfollowers,EmileDurkheim

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
      2656                          TheTohrey,o rCyu,ltCuurletu &re S&ociSeotcyi e3t8y(07(-80))
                                                             
                                                             
       and Claude Levi-Strauss among others, who are widely recognized as
       ‘founding fathers’ of sociology and anthropology or, more broadly, the
       paradigm of the social sciences as the knowledge base for modernity.
       Bird-David argued that, even though Tylor, Durkheim and
       Levi-Strauss differed in their attitudes to indigenous knowledges, they
       all considered animism to be erroneous vis-a-vis European/modernist
       epistemology. What made animism ‘primitive’ in their view was its
       ‘inability’ to separate nonhuman (i.e. nature) from human, which
       ‘allows’ these categories to have ostensibly spurious commonalities,
       regardless of how they are referred to (e.g. ‘spirit’, ‘soul’, ‘totemic
       parts’, and ‘personhood’). This interpretation of animism derives from
       the imposition of European epistemology upon other knowledges (i.e.
       Eurocentrism) (Bird-David, 1999).                     
        Inotherwords,Tylor‘lockedup’animisminCartesiandualism(asthe
       ‘primitive religion’ of the ‘rude savage’) and analysed it through the
       prism of modernity. By ‘locking up’ animism in the realm of estranged
       ‘primitiveculture’,heestablishedanimismastheantithesisofmodernity.
       This is not surprising because modernity began with the subjugation of
       ‘superstition’ and ‘magic’ to be replaced with rationality and science. As
       pointed out by Max Weber (2020 [1918]), disenchantment and secularism
       are key to modernity. Furthermore, as Beck holds, ‘Europe is the key to
       secularization’ (2010: 20). In other words, the human-nature dichotomy
       and anthropocentrism as hierarchical dualisms are embedded with the
       notion of progress and modernity, which is culturally and historically
       bound to secularism and Eurocentrism. Together, they constitute the
       foundational tripod of the modernist social scientific paradigm: 1)
       anthropocentrism, 2) secularism, and 3) Eurocentrism. The 19th-century
       Tylorian animism is an early formulation of this dualistic articulation
       within the social sciences, but these are dualisms the social sciences have
       not yet escaped (Beck, 2010; Connell, 2007).          
        Advocates of new animism challenged this foundational tripod of
       modernist social sciences, based on the notion that ‘the project of mod-
       ernity is ill-conceived and dangerously performed’ (Harvey,2005: xii). In
       contrast to Tylorian animism, proponents of new animism critique mod-
       ernity through an animist mirror in which animist epistemology’s alter-
       native ways of knowing and being are deployed to question the premises
       of social scientific knowledge. Depending on the frame of reference each
       researcher uses, different interpretations of animism are offered. Thus,
       animism has been taken to represent relational epistemology (Bird-
       David, 1999); perspectivism (Viveiros de Castro, 2004); different ontolo-
       gies of nature (Descola, 1996); or recognition of the ability to sense the
       vitalistic force that is constantly on the verge of the actual or becoming
       (Ingold,2006:10).Nonetheless, thecorestance ofnewanimism seemsto
       be recent scholars’ positive embrace of an epistemology/ontology which
       envisages overlapping commonalities between human and nonhuman,

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
        Yoneyama                                      7      
        Yoneyama                                     257     
                                                             
        i.e. tocreateapositive animism whichseekstodisruptthehuman:nature
        dichotomy.                                           
          Although new animism has given a positive valence to animistic epis-
        temology and ontology, it has three weaknesses that prevent it from
        developing into a powerful critical tool to bring about change in mod-
        ernity. First, new animism is exemplified via the cases of mostly hunter-
        gatherer indigenous communities often farthest away from modernity,
        andinthisveryprocess,ithas(again)enclosedanimisminthespacethat
        is the antithesis of modernity which, in turn, renders it almost irrelevant
        inmainstreamsocialscience,letaloneineverydaylifeinmodernsociety.
        AlfHornborg(2015b)writes:‘Howevermuchweadmiretheeco-cosmol-
        ogies of the Nayaka, the Achuar, or the Cree, we should not expect to
        encounter them anywhere but in the anthropology departments,
        and definitely not in mainstream textbooks on ecology or sustainability’
        (p. 248).                                            
          Second, methodologically, new animism still has an element of
        Eurocentrism, through its ethnographic approach which creates the div-
        ision between the observer and the observed (Fabian, 2014). The obser-
        ver (who is normally an Anglophone researcher) converts the local
        animistic epistemology/ontology into abstract and academic terminolo-
        gies, concepts and theories which have currency largely within highly
        specialized academic circles in the West. The voices of the indigenous
        peoples, or ‘native informants’ (Spivak, 1999), are limited to what is
        captured as data and presented as quotations, to construct the research-
        er’s argument or theory. With its frame of reference and research meth-
        ods, new animism still tends to ‘lock up’ animism as the antithesis of
        modernity in a dualistic manner. New animism thus does not provide a
        cultural frame of reference that is strong enough to address Ghosh’s
        ‘crisis of culture/imagination’ alluded to earlier.  
          Third, reference to Asia, especially contemporary Asia, is seriously
        lacking in new animism, despite the fact that pantheistic religious trad-
        itions (Hinduism, Buddhism, and Taoism) are very relevant to animism.
        Mark MacWilliams (2008) for instance remarks that what is missing
        from Graham Harvey’s Animism (2005) is reference to Japan. He holds
        that ‘studying Japanese animism overcomes the author’s unconscious
        dichotomythatisbasedonahackneyedWesternstereotypeoftheprimi-
        tive and the modern, the indigenous and the Western’ (p. 265). This
        weakness persists in The Handbook of Contemporary Animism (Harvey,
        2015), where the reference to contemporary Asia is extremely limited. It
        isinthiscontextthatMiyazaki’sanimismissignificant.Itisnotonlythat
        hisfilmscanprovidestoriesandvisionsofanimismforaglobalaudience.
        When framed academically, it has the potential to fill in the gap left by
        new animism. This is because his animism, here called ‘critical animism’,
        is formed from within modernity as a critique of modernity by those who
        actually observe animistic epistemology, ontology and practices.1

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
      8                              Theory, Culture & Society 0(0)
      258                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(7-8)
                                                             
      Critical Animism                                       
      ‘Critical animism’ emerged 1) from the fusion of intangible cultural heri-
      tageandacritiqueofmodernity,and2)asalegacyofMinamatadisease,
      alarge-scaleindustrialpollutionthatsurfacedinthe1950sandcontinued
      to be a major issue that caused immeasurable human, social and eco-
      logicaldevastation(Ui,1992;George,2001).Criticalanimismarosefrom
      a conscious embrace of animism built on a knowing critique of the
      modern. As will be elaborated below, it is a philosophy that ideates
      nature as the combination of the life-world and the spiritual-world
      from which all life emerges, with particular emphasis on the significance
      of locality/place.                                     
        Morespecifically,mynotionofcriticalanimismhasbeenderivedfrom
      the analysis of the life stories of Miyazaki Hayao and three other distin-
      guished intellectuals in Japan, who have a strong association with
      Minamata.2 I refer to their animism as ‘critical’ because it emanated
      from people who experienced problematic aspects of modernity, which
      caused a ‘paradigm shift’ in their own lives: that is, they came to realize
      that animism is essential for surviving modernity. In other words, an
      experience of modernity is a precondition for critical animism. Although
      animistic cosmology existed in pre-modern times, the concept did not
      exist in people’s minds at that time (Ishimure and Tsurumi, 2002: 278).
      People did not need to have animism as a concept because they lived it:
      they were firmly part of animistic ontology. In contrast, the animism of
      these intellectuals arose as a product of modernity, to reflect upon mod-
      ernity, and as such was deeply ‘indebted’ to the modern.
        Their animism also resulted from strong self-reflexivity. In order to
      explorethisself-reflexivity,Iadopteda‘narrative’approachproposedby
      Jean-Franc¸ois Lyotard. In The Postmodern Condition (1979) Lyotard
      maintains that: the narrative exists outside of scientific knowledge, clo-
      sely related to the ‘knower’ (p. 7), free from the need to legitimate argu-
      mentation through proof (p. 27). It can create a new meaning that
      emerges from the movement against established ways of reasoning, and
      anewkindofknowledgethatilluminatestheunknown(p.60).Although
      critical animism is a term I coined, it is based on an analysis of animism
      that Miyazaki and others explore in their own words in the context of
      their own lives. It is not based on the privilege of a researcher trying to
      represent and make sense of the world of indigenous people, as pointed
      out by Descola (2015: 78).                             
        Miyazaki’s animism is based on his self-reflexivity as Japanese, on his
      struggletofindhisownidentitywhilebeingcritical ofJapanasanation-
      state.Hisdiscoverythatnature,broadleafevergreenforestsinparticular,
      encompasses part of Japan and neighbouring Asia in a common cultural
      zone, a way of life based on the forests, enabled Miyazaki to re-establish
      hisidentityassomeonebroughtupinJapannotasastatebutaspartofa
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
        Yoneyama                                      9      
        Yoneyama                                     259     
                                                             
        broaderculturalzonedefinedbynature.Thisrealization,inturn,enabled
        himtoreconnecttothewaynatureisperceivedatthegrassrootsinJapan
        where animistic cosmology remained intact (Miyazaki, 1996: 357–8).3
          Animism is at the core of Miyazaki’s film production. He explains
        (1996: 110–11) that films do not come from his mind but exist external
        to him. He finds them, with tremendous effort, using his subconscious,
        until afilm ‘pops out all of a sudden’. He further explains (1996: 429–30)
        that he does ‘not make a film’, but that a film ‘tries to become a film’ by
        forcinghimtomakeafilm,bymakinghim‘aslavetothefilm’.Miyazaki
        also states that this agent, the film, is ‘something like the memory of
        mitochondria’ (2008b), which is akin to the memory of life from ancient
        times (Miyazaki, 2008a: 225).                        
          Miyazaki’saccountofthepresenceoffilmsasanindependentexternal
        agency is very similar to the account of devaru for the Nayaka as
        explained by Bird-David (1999: S74). For the Nayaka, something
        unseen called devaru ‘exist in the world’, which make themselves appar-
        ent in an unexpected way such as ‘elephant devaru’ and ‘stone devaru’,
        which can be noticed by those who know how to pay attention. Devaru
        preserve information in the form of ‘pictures more than words, motion
        pictures more than pictures’. The Nayaka hold communal events to let
        devaru ‘perform’, to make them alive, to enable them to raise ‘people’s
        awareness of their existence in-the-world’ (p. S77), and to transmit it to
        the next generation (p. S74).                        
          Thus, both Miyazaki and the Nayaka pay attention to this independ-
        ent, external agency, a film-like entity, which tries to convey to the next
        generation their existence in-the-world. Instead of holding communal
        events, Miyazaki lets this agency, the film, ‘perform’ by animating it
        (i.e. making it alive) to convey animistic images and stories to a global
        audience, especially to the young. Miyazaki can actually explain this
        animism in his own words from the position of an individual who lives
        firmly in modernity. It is as if he transforms Nayakan animism from a
        modern animist’s perspective. It is as if Miyazaki is engaged in the mod-
        ernization of animism, to liberate animism from the confinement of the
        hunter-gathers’ cultural zone, to let it connect to the global audience, to
        raise their awareness of the existence of something like ‘memory of life’
        in-the-world, to attend to the crisis of imagination and culture.
          Comparedwithnewanimistscholarship,theoretically,Miyazaki’sani-
        mism presents a deeper critique of 1) human-nature dualism/anthropo-
        centrism, 2) secularism, and 3) Eurocentrism, the ‘tripod’ foundations of
        modernity. First, as discussed earlier, it is not just the human-nature
        dichotomy that Miyazaki challenges: he negates dualism itself, which
        presents a far greater disruption to the modernist social science para-
        digm. Second, for Miyazaki, the unseen world is not just a spiritual
        world, it is a life-world which comes with a concrete entity such as a
        film memory of life. Although this is in line with the definition of
           ¼                                                 

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
      21600                         TheTohrey,o Cryu,ltCuurlet u&re S&ociSeotyc ie3t8y(70-(80))
                                                             
                                                             
       animism, it accentuates how the animistic notion of nature goes beyond
       the dichotomy of spirituality vs materiality with life as a connecting
       entity. Third, it is not that Miyazaki’s animism implies a challenge spe-
       cifically to Eurocentrism. The antithesis of Eurocentrism would not be
       Asianism (or any other region-specific-isms). Instead, animism which is
       ‘intensely local’ and political (Clammer, 2004), is oriented towards a
       theory of place. Miyazaki’s animism is closer to what Arif Dirlik calls
       a ‘radical project of the place’ (Dirlik, 2005). The local is seen to be
       openly connected with multitudes of places to constitute ‘translocal alli-
       ances’(Dirlik,2005:53)whichcounterglobalmonopolizationofcultures
       and economy (see Yoneyama, 2019: 221 on star sands).  
        To sum up, Miyazaki Hayao’s animism is an extension of new ani-
       mism,butithasmorepotentialthannewanimismtoradicallydestabilize
       the foundational tripod of the modernist paradigm of social science. His
       critical animism rejects Anthropocentrism, negates dualism, secularism,
       and Eurocentrism, and is oriented towards the politics of place in order
       to counter hierarchical power structures. A memorable contribution of
       Miyazaki’s animism to the critique of Western hierarchical dualism is an
       imageofananimisticworldwherethelife-worldandspiritual-worldexist
       as one vitalistic force.4 With its tremendous influence beyond academia,
       this image has the potential to stimulate our imagination in a new dir-
       ection and construct a different paradigm that is free from the hierarch-
       ical dualisms between human and nature, material and spiritual and
       European and the other.                               
        Meanwhile, the tripod assumptions remain embedded in modernity,
       andinsteadof waning,theyappeartobegettingstrongerwith theriseof
       the Anthropocene narrative, a powerful scientism that has become a
       contemporary meta-narrative (Chernilo, 2017). In the dominant
       Anthropocene discourse, nature is not deemed to have independent
       autonomy; it is considered to be something controlled by scientific and
       technological intervention. Nature is seen as something to be humanized
       and domesticated, and as such it augments anthropocentrism (Lo¨vbrand
       et al., 2015). With its strong scientism, the Anthropocene meta-narrative
       also reinforces the secularism that arose in pursuit of science in oppos-
       ition to religion during the Enlightenment. Furthermore, critical social
       scientistsareconcernedthatthescientificAnthropocenediscourseunder-
       mines the critical work accumulated in the social sciences as it presents
       humans as a monolithic category vis-a-vis nature, and thus fails to see
       differences and inequalities within human society (e.g. Lo¨vbrand et al.,
       2015; Malm and Hornborg, 2014; Simpson, 2020). This is problematic
       because carbon footprints differ significantly between rich and poor
       countries and it is not ‘fair to speak of the climate change crisis as a
       common ‘‘human’’ concern’ (Braidotti, 2013: 88; Chakrabarty, 2009);
       and the road to the climate crisis has also been paved, historically, on
       unequal and exploitative social, economic, and political systems such as

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
        Yoneyama                                     11      
        Yoneyama                                     261     
                                                             
        slavery, colonialism, and imperialism (Malm and Hornborg, 2014;
        Ghosh, 2016). Presenting a neutralized view of humans without critical
        and political insights makes the scientism of the Anthropocene narrative
        a Eurocentric colonial discourse (Simpson, 2020; Ghosh, 2016: 87).
         The Anthropocene meta-narrative has direct implications for the dir-
        ection of social sciences as well. If, as Clive Hamilton et al. (2015: 4)
        argue, nature/the earth is considered as the physical (e.g. topography,
        energy cycles), to which social sciences ‘must come back’ from our cur-
        rent less physical concerns (e.g. economy, society, and culture), then the
        social sciences ‘need to be rematerialized’ to the new ‘techno-natural
        orders’. If, on the other hand, nature is seen as a manifestation of vital
        energy which encompasses the life-world and spiritual-world, as in ani-
        mism, then the social sciences are in need of a ‘re-enchantment’. In the
        ageoftheAnthropocene,weareatacrossroadwithregardtothenotion
        of humans and nature, in such a way that also involves questions of life
        and spirituality.                                    
         In the search for a new direction for social scientific research, Gisli
        Palsson et al. (2013) conclude that ‘we must explore how Western
        thought traditions, hitherto heavily dependent on the dualism of
        nature and society, can confront their internal limits and intellectual
        tipping points’ (p. 11). In order to find a new direction of social sciences,
        it is imperative to open up to a broader set of knowledge traditions and
        communities(Lo¨ vbrandetal.,2015;Simpson,2015;Ghosh,2016).What
        is required is a different cultural frame of reference to stimulate our
        imagination into an entirely different epistemology and ontology.
        Otherwise, this exploration of a new paradigm may not get very far.
        Miyazaki’s massive popularity suggests an intuitive grasping or hunger
        forhisanimistic stance intheglobal audience. Isit possible thathisfilms
        prepare the global audience (including social scientists) to be more
        attuned to the animistic epistemology and ontology, in such a way as
        to redress Ghosh’s crisis of imagination and culture?
         Much value may be gained from bringing his critical animism into
        dialogue with the social sciences to move our exploration of the social
        scientificparadigminanewdirection.Miyazaki’sanimismhasthepoten-
        tial to radically rupture the existing paradigm of social sciences and to
        open new ways for the social sciences to understand and engage with the
        world. First, this may include not only to ‘speak for nature’ (Lo¨vbrand
        et al., 2015) but to be more sensitized to what nature is speaking to us
        (Ghosh, 2016: 30). If we want to pursue the revision of the human-non-
        human binary in a non-hierarchical and non-dualistic manner, this is a
        legitimate question to ask. Second, the scientific method might also be
        met with listening very hard for the agent, e.g. the film, which is ‘some-
        thing like the memory of mitochondria’. Animistic epistemology might
        one day join with scientific discovery. Scientists seem to agree that there
        isacommonancestorofalllivingthings,includinghumans(Weissetal.,

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
      12                             Theory, Culture & Society 0(0)
      262                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(7-8)
                                                             
      2016), and recent developments in epigenetics suggest that living crea-
      turesmightbeabletotransmitsome‘memoryoflife’totheirdescendants
      (Aristizabal et al., 2019). These examples suggest that it may be worth
      rethinking the relationship between humans and nature in the broader,
      non-anthropocentric design of the life-world. Third, political action and
      culture must be enriched in such a way as to connect local and diverse
      understandings of the world, to form Dirlik’s ‘translocal alliances’
      (2005), each with a sense of belonging to the place including the nonhu-
      man existence (Gibson-Graham, 2011) and numinous power. This atten-
      tion to local ‘detail’ will expose the inequalities and damage perpetuated
      by Eurocentric modernism, but also provide diverse cultural frames of
      reference that are much needed for imagining something new.
        With these possibilities, the challenge for social scientists is to make
      the critique both verbal and theoretical. This will entail taking animistic
      nature as sui generis. With a change in our perceptions and imagination
      stimulated by Miyazaki’s films, it may not be entirely improbable. After
      all, we did not have a concept of ‘society’ beyond individuals until
      Durkheim established it as sui generis. Miyazaki’s animation films,
      which push the boundaries and possibilities of being and knowing, col-
      lectively provide a ‘perfect story’ to help us respond more fundamentally
      to the ‘perfect storm’ created by the Anthropocene.    
      Acknowledgements                                       
      I would like to thank Danielle LeMieux, Shirley Leane, Michael Barr, Helene Bowen
      Raddeker,AnnaSzorenyi,ChillaBulbeck,anonymousreviewers,andtheeditorialboard
      ofTCSfortheirveryhelpfulandinsightfulcommentsandfeedbackonmymanuscript.
      Notes                                                  
      1. In my book (Yoneyama, 2019) I use the term ‘postmodern animism’ rather
        than ‘critical animism’. As discussed more fully in the book, the term ‘post-
        modern animism’ signals its emergence in a critique of Japanese modernist
        society.Thiscontextisoutlinedbrieflyinthenextsection.Astheterm‘post-
        modern’hasdifferentimplicationsinvaryingcontexts,theoreticalframesand
        disciplinary backgrounds, the term ‘critical animism’ is used in this article.
      2. Minamata disease was very influential to Miyazaki and it inspired him to
        create the story of Nausicaa¨ (Miyazaki and Callenbach, 1985: 342).
      3. For more detailed analysis of Miyazaki’s life story see Yoneyama (2019:
        159–204).                                            
      4. Some of these characteristics resonate with Rosi Braidotti’s (2013) posthu-
        manism, although a review of the vast range of posthumanism exceeds the
        scope of this article.                               
      References                                             
      Aristizabal, Maria, Anreiter, Ina and Halldorsdottir, Thorhildur, et al. (2019)
        Biological embedding of experience: A primer on epigenetics. PNAS, 17
        October.                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
        YYoonneeyyaammaa                             21633   
                                                             
                                                             
        Beck, Ulrich (2010) A God of One’s Own. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Bird-David, Nurit (1999) ‘Animism’ revisited: Personhood, environment, and
         relationalepistemology.CurrentAnthropology40(suppl.February):S67–S79.
        Braidotti, Rosi (2013) The Posthuman. Cambridge: Polity Press.
        Chakrabarty,Dipesh(2009)Theclimateofhistory:Fourtheses.CriticalInquiry
         35: 197–222.                                        
        Chernilo,Daniel(2017)ThequestionofthehumanintheAnthropocenedebate.
         European Journal of Social Theory 20(1): 44–60.     
        Clammer, John (2004) The politics of animism. In: Clammer, John, Poirier,
         Sylvie and Schwimmer, Eric (eds) Figured Worlds. Toronto: University of
         Toronto Press.                                      
        Connell,Raewyn(2007)SouthernTheory:TheGlobalDynamicsofKnowledgein
         Social Science. Crows Nest: Allen and Unwin.        
        Descola, Philippe (1996) Constructing natures. In: Descola, Philippe and
         Pa´lsson, Gı`sli (eds) Nature and Society. London: Routledge.
        Descola,Philippe(2015[2013])Beyondnatureandculture.In:Harvey,Graham
         (ed.) The Handbook of Contemporary Animism. London: Routledge.
        Descola, Philippe and Pa´lsson, Gı`sli (eds) (1996) Nature and Society. London:
         Routledge.                                          
        Dirlik, Arif (2005) Globalism and the politics of place. In: Olds, Kris, Dicken,
         Peter, Kelly, Philip, et al. (eds) Globalisation and the Asia-Pacific. London:
         Routledge.                                          
        Fabian, Johannes (2014) Time and the Other: How Anthropology Makes Its
         Object. New York: Columbia University Press.        
        George,Timothy(2001)Minamata:PollutionandtheStruggleforDemocracyin
         Postwar Japan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center.
        Ghosh, Amitav (2016) The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the
         Unthinkable. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
        Gibson-Graham, JK (2011) A feminist project of belonging for the
         Anthropocene. Gender, Place and Culture 18(1): 1–21.
        Hamilton,Clive,Bonneuil,ChristopheandGemenne,Franc¸oı`s(2015)Thinking
         theAnthropocene. In:Hamilton, Clive,Bonneuil, Christopheand Gemenne,
         Franc¸oı`s (eds) The Anthropocene and the Global Environmental Crisis.
         London: Routledge.                                  
        Haraway, Donna (1991) Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of
         Nature. New York: Routledge.                        
        Haraway, Donna (2015) Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene,
         Chthulucene: Making kin. Environmental Humanities 6: 159–165.
        Harvey, Graham (2005) Animism: Respecting the Living World. London: Hurst
         and Co.                                             
        Harvey, Graham (2015 [2013]) Introduction. In: Harvey, Graham (ed.) The
         Handbook of Contemporary Animism. London: Routledge.
        Hornborg, Alf (2015a) The political ecology of the technocene. In: Hamilton,
         Clive, Bonneuil, Christophe and Gemenne, Franc¸oı`s (eds) The Anthropocene
         and the Global Environmental Crisis. London: Routledge.
        Hornborg,Alf(2015b[2013])Submittingtoobjects:Animism,fetishism,andthe
         cultural foundations of capitalism. In: Harvey, Graham (ed.) The Handbook
         of Contemporary Animism. London: Routledge.         

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
      14                             Theory, Culture & Society 0(0)
      264                           Theory, Culture & Society 38(7-8)
                                                             
      Inglehart, Ronald (1997) Modernization and Postmodernization. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press.                          
      Ingold, Tim (2006) Rethinking the animate, re-animating thought. Ethnos:
        Journal of Anthropology 71(1): 9–20.                 
      Ishimure, Michiko and Tsurumi, Kazuko (2002) Tsurumi Kazuko taiwa
        Mandara: Ishimure Michiko [Tsurumi Kazuko’s Mandala dialogue with
        Ishimure Michiko]. Tokyo: Fujiwara shoten.           
      Jensen, Casper and Blok, Anders (2013) Techno-animism in Japan: Shinto cos-
        mograms,actor-networktheory,andtheenablingpowerofnon-humanagen-
        cies. Theory, Culture & Society 30(2): 84–115.       
      Latour, Bruno (1993) We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.                                    
      Lo¨vbrand, Eva, Beck, Silke, Chilvers, Jason, et al. (2015) Who speaks for the
        futureofearth?Howcriticalsocialsciencecanextendtheconversationonthe
        Anthropocene. Global Environmental Change 32: 211–218.
      Lyotard, Jean-Franc¸ois (1979) The Postmodern Condition. Minneapolis:
        University of Minnesota Press.                       
      MacWilliams, Mark (2008) Book review of Animism: Respecting the Living
        World (by Graham Harvey). Religious Studies Review 34(4): 265.
      Malm, Andreas and Hornborg, Alf (2014) The geology of mankind? A critique
        of the Anthropocene narrative. The Anthropocene Review 1(1): 62–69.
      Miyazaki, Hayao (1996) Starting Point: 1979–1996, trans. Beth Cary and
        Frederik Schodt. San Francisco: Viz Media.           
      Miyazaki, Hayao (2008a) Turning Point: 1997–2008, trans. Beth Cary and
        Frederik Schodt. San Francisco: Viz Media.           
      Miyazaki, Hayao (2008b) A documentary film, NHK Hyakunen intabyu [100
        year interview], broadcast on 20 November. Interviewer: Watanabe, Ayumi.
      Miyazaki, Hayao (2012) Nausicaa¨ of the Valley of the Wind (manga version:
        Deluxe Edition), trans. David Lewis and Toren Smith. San Francisco: Viz
        Media.                                               
      Miyazaki,Hayao(2013)Kazenokaerubasho[Theplacewherethewindreturns],
        collection of interviews by Shibuya Yoichi conducted in 1990–2001. Tokyo:
        Bungei-shunju.                                       
      Miyazaki, Hayao and Callenbach, Ernest (1985) ‘Kaze no tani’ no mirai o
        kataro: Hi o suteru? [Let’s talk about the future of the ‘Valley of the
        Wind’: Discarding the fire?] Asahi Journal, 7 June, reprinted in Miyazaki,
        Hayao, Shuppatsuten [Starting point]. Tokyo: Tokuma shoten.
      Morrison, Kenneth (2015 [2013]) Animism and a proposal for a post-Cartesian
        anthropology. In: Harvey, Graham (ed.) The Handbook of Contemporary
        Animism. London: Routledge.                          
      Morris-Suzuki, Tessa (1998) Re-Inventing Japan: Time, Space, Nation.
        New York: M.E. Sharpe.                               
      Mumcu, Sema and Yilmaz, Serap (2018) Anime landscapes as a tool for
        analysing the human-environment relationship: Hayao Miyazaki films. Arts
        7(2): 16.                                            
      Napier, Susan (2006) The world of anime fandom in America. In: Lunning,
        Frenchy (ed.) Mechademia 1. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
      Napier,Susan(2018)Miyazakiworld:ALifeinArt.NewHaven:YaleUniversity
        Press.                                               

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
        YYoonneeyyaammaa                             21655   
                                                             
                                                             
        Ogihara-Schuck, Eriko (2014) Miyazaki’s Animism Abroad. Jefferson:
         McFarland.                                          
        Palsson, Gisli, Szerszynski, Bronislaw, So¨rlin, Sverker, et al. (2013)
         Reconceptualizing the ‘Anthropos’ in the Anthropocene. Environmental
         Science & Policy 28: 3–13.                          
        Pan, Yuan (2020) Human-nature relationships in East Asian animated films.
         Societies 10(35): 13.                               
        Plumwood,Val(2015)Natureintheactivevoice.In:Harvey,Graham(ed.)The
         Handbook of Contemporary Animism. London: Routledge.
        Pope Francis (2015) Encyclical Letter Laudato Si of the Holy Father Francis on
         Care for Our Common Home. Vatican: Vatican Press.   
        Reinders, Eric (2016) The Moral Narratives of Hayao Miyazaki. Jefferson:
         McFarland.                                          
        Reitan,Richard(2017)EcologyandJapanesehistory:Reactionaryenvironmen-
         talism’s troubled relationship with the past. The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan
         Focus 15(3), Article 5007.                          
        Rose, Deborah (2013) Val Plumwood’s philosophical animism. Environmental
         Humanities 1(3): 93–109.                            
        Simpson, Michael (2020) The Anthropocene as colonial discourse. Environment
         and Planning D (EPD): Society and Space 38(1): 53–71.
        Spivak,GayatriChakravorty(1999)ACritiqueofPostcolonialReason.Calcutta:
         Seagull Books.                                      
        Thomas, Jolyon Baraka (2019) Spirit/Medium: Critically examining the rela-
         tionship between animism and animation. In: Rambelli, Fabio (ed.) Spirits
         and Animism in Contemporary Japan. London: Bloomsbury, pp. 157–170.
        Tylor,Edward(1871)Primitive Culture,Vol.2,7thedn.London:JohnMurray.
        Ui,Jun(1992)Industrial PollutioninJapan.Tokyo:UnitedNations University.
        Umehara, Takeshi (1989) Anismizumu saiko [Animism reconsidered]. Nihon
         Kenkyu [Japanese Studies] 1(1): 13–23.              
        UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization)
         (n.d.) What is Intangible Cultural Heritage? Available at: https://ich.unes-
         co.org/en/what-is-intangible-heritage-00003 (accessed 26 December 2020).
        Viveiros de Castro, Eduardo (2004) Exchanging perspectives: The transform-
         ation of objects into subjects in Amerindian. Common Knowledge 10(3):
         463–484.                                            
        Weber, Max (2020 [1918]) The Vocation Lectures. In: Reitter, Paul and
         Wellmon, Chad (eds) Charisma and Disenchantment, trans. Damion Searls.
         New York: New York Review of Books.                 
        Weiss,Madeline,Sousa,Filipa,Mrnjavac,Natalia,etal.(2016)Thephysiology
         and habitat of the last universal common ancestor. Nature Microbiology 1,
         article 16116.                                      
        Wright, Lucy (2005) Forest spirits, giant insects and world trees: The
         nature vision of Hayao Miyazaki. Journal of Religion and Popular Culture
         10(1): 3.                                           
        Yasuda, Yoshinori (2006) Isshinkyo no yami: Animizumu no fukken [The dark-
         ness of monotheism: The revival of animism]. Tokyo: Chikuma shoten.
        Yoneyama,Shoko(2017)Animism:Agrassrootsresponsetosocioenvironmen-
         tal crisis in Japan. In: Morris-Suzuki, Tessa and Soh, Eun Jeong (eds) New

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      21666                         TheTohreyo, rCyu,lCtuurletu &re S&ocSieotcyi e3t8y(07(-08))
                                                             
        Worlds from Below: Informal Life Politics and Grassroots Action in Twenty-
        First-Century Northeast Asia. Canberra: ANU Press.   
      Yoneyama, Shoko (2019) Animism in Contemporary Japan: Voices for the
        Anthropocene from Post-Fukushima Japan. London: Routledge.
                                                             
      Shoko Yoneyama (PhD) is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Social
      Sciences at the University of Adelaide, Australia.     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             