[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Original Research Article                              
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2025,Vol.0(0)1–23   
      The  hegemonic   world  picture:                       
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2025   
      Representation,  post-truth, and                       
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      arti fi cial intelligence          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537251374951
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Michaelangelo Anastasiou                              
      UniversityofNicosia,Cyprus                             
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      Thepresentarticlecontributestorecentscholarshipon‘post-truth’politics.Itemploysa
      semiotic approach that traces the onslaught of ‘post-truth’ politics to the logic of AI-
      powered communication systems. AI-powered digital communications expedite infor-
      mationflows,leadingtothecomplexificationandambiguationofrepresentation,whichis
      leveraged in the form of political rhetoric in the service of factional interests and
      hegemonic ambitions. From this perspective, post-truth politics involve the symbolic
      consolidationofdisparate(digital)representationsvis-a`-vis‘totalrepresentations’where
      ‘a part’ comes to represent ‘the whole’. By lacking propositional specificity, total rep-
      resentationsexceedonadefactobasisconventionaltruthverificationstandardsandare
      implicated in the alignment of factional interests and political outlooks by contingently
      fixing the free-flow of information in digital communications. The article concludes by
      situatingitsfindingswithincurrentdebatesonde-democratization,directingattentionto
      how rhetorical representations can be leveraged in the service of democracy.
      Keywords                                               
      post-truth, representation, artificial intelligence, democracy, rhetoric, digital public
      sphere, politics, hegemony                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      I Introduction                                         
      Therehavebeenscoresofstudiesinrecentyearsthathavecenteredonwhathasbroadly
      been labeled ‘post-truth politics’. Key findings indicate a general epistemic shift in the
      publicsphere,wherescientificandexpertknowledgesystemsareincreasinglydisplaced
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      MichaelangeloAnastasiou,DigitalTransitions&Society,UniversityofNicosia,HumanitiesBuilding,203a,46
      MakedonitissasAvenue,CY-2417,P.O.Box24005,CY-1700,Nicosia,Cyprus.
      Email:anastasiouma@gmail.com                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      2                             Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      by‘disinformation’,‘fakenews’,‘conspiracytheories’and,morerecently,‘deepfakes’.
      Thesetrendsareexacerbatedbynoveldigitalinstruments,predominantlyassociatedwith
      socialmediaand(generative)artificialintelligence.Asanoutcome,‘conventional’truth
      verificationsystemsareincreasinglydelegitimizedand‘alternative’truthclaimscirculate,
      raisingprofoundquestionsaboutthetrajectoryofcontemporarypolitics.Byundermining
      social consensus, ‘post-truth’ politics have obstructed effective responses to social,
      political, and environmental problems that necessitate urgent collective intervention.
        Conventionalcritiquesof‘post-truth’politicsemploya(quasi)objectivistoutlookthat
      takes the notion of ‘post-truth’ at face value. They are typically underpinned by com-
      mitment to rationalism and empiricism, where expertise, reason, science, etc. are
      counterposed to the presumed emotionalism of ‘post-truth’ politics. By extension, they
      oftenacquireapronouncedmoralistic(ifnotpolemic)tone,where‘post-truth’politicsare
      admonished on the basis of their presumed irrationalism. These critiques, however,
      beholdrestrictedpoliticalefficacy.Theunderlyingcommitmenttorationalismessentially
      reducestheanalyticparameters toquestions ofempirical verification—whatis‘right or
      wrong’.Thesolutionto‘post-truth’isthusposedintermsofanurgentcallingtorealign
      ‘fact’ and ‘ideas’, in all their manifestations (statements, representations, institutional
      processes, outlooks, etc.).                            
        The present article contributes to these discussions in a two-fold manner. First, it
      directs inquiry towhether absolute conceptionsoftruthamounttoanattainablegoal. It
      doessobyscrutinizingtheessentialistprincipleofrationalandempiricalcorrespondence
      (between ‘fact’ and ‘representation’). The guiding question is whether the dichotomy
      between‘true’and‘false’representationcanbesubstantiatedagainstanexaminationof
      the ontology of representation. By examining how contemporary social and political
      thoughthavedestabilizedtheessentialistparadigm,thepresentarticleconcludesthatany
      process of representation is constitutively ambiguous. Thus, there can be, strictly
      speaking, no distinction between ‘true’ and ‘false’ representations. Building on these
      theoretical foundations, it is demonstrated that the constitution of power relations ger-
      minateswithinrepresentationalambiguity.Inshort,hegemonicambitionsareactualized
      through the employment of ambiguous rhetorical modalities—what is termed ‘total
      representations’—that‘speakto’theinterestsofparticularsocialandpoliticalidentities.
        These theoretical premises are then related to the socio-political coordinates of the
      digital public sphere. It is argued that (AI powered) digital communication systems
      exacerbaterepresentationalcomplexificationandambiguity.Thisambiguityispolitically
      leveragedintheformofrhetoric,whereby‘sloganesque’representationsareemployedin
      aheuristicfashion,intheserviceoffactionalpoliticalinterests.Inthissense,hegemonic
      ambitions in the digital public sphere are seen as ‘mirroring’ the logic of AI-powered
      mediatizedcommunication.Byimplication,aneffectivecounter-offensiveto‘post-truth’
      politics would notmerely involve a realignmentof ‘fact’ and ‘representation’. It would
      involve epistemic and political strategies that work through the logic of representation,
      wherebyrepresentationalambiguity,intheformofrhetoric,isleveragedintheserviceof
      democracy.                                             
        The article concludes by situating its findings within current debates on de-
      democratization, the relationship between postmodernism and the Far Right and crises

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                      3      
                                                             
                                                             
      indemocraticrepresentation.Contrarytoscholarlyorthodoxy,whichlamentsthelossof
      ‘truth’ and ‘science’, advocating for their restoration as key political compasses, the
      presentarticleoffersinsightintothepoliticalutilityofrhetoric,directingattentiontohow
      it can be used to advance democratic ambitions.        
                                                             
      II Representation in social and political thought      
      Formostofitstrajectory,Westernscholarshipwasfundamentallyguidedbythedoctrine
      ofessentialism,whichpositsthattheultimatelyrealityofideasandobjectsisgovernedby
      an ‘internal’ and unchanging essence that can be made intelligible (Laclau and Mouffe
      1987).AndwhileessentialismassumesadiversityofformsintheWesternphilosophical
      canon, the implication is that the innermost identity of an object or idea can find an
      unadulteratedexpressioninmeaningorcontemplation(LaclauandMouffe1987).There
      can thus be, on some level, or under certain circumstances of empirical or rational
      verification,aone-to-onecorrespondencebetween‘object/idea’and‘thought/language’,
      or logical coherence between ‘thought/language’ and systemic patterns (Laclau and
      Mouffe 1987, 2001).                                    
        Classical metaphysics, as well as modern social and political thought were either
      explicitly or implicitly guided by the tenets of correspondence and coherence theory of
      truth.Thiswasexpressedinvarioustheoreticalquests,whichsoughttodecipher,among
      manyothers:‘theessenceofman’(Aristotle,2000;Descartes,2008;Kant,2002,2007;
      Leibniz,2007;Locke,2003;Marx,1978a;Plato,2004;Rousseau,1999),‘theessenceof
      God’(Kant,1992;Leibniz,2007;Locke,2003),‘theessenceofnature’(Aristotle,1992;
      Leibniz, 2007; Marx, 1978a), ‘the essence of things’ (Aristotle 1992, 1998; Leibniz,
      2007), ‘laws of historical motion’ (Hegel, 1977; Marx, 1978a, 1978c), etc. Indeed, the
      Enlightenment’s promise, especially in its rationalist and empiricist variants, took es-
      sentialismasanepistemologicalstartingpoint(HorkheimerandAdorno,2002).Oncethe
      innermostessenceofRealityandthusTruthwasdiscovered,humanexperiencecouldbe
      ordered according to essential predicates and be harmonious with itself (Comte, 2009;
      Hegel, 1977; Kant, 1996; Marx, 1978b).                 
        Within the essentialist paradigm, the notion of representation was often cast with
      reference to the principle of verifiability, which was predicated on the long-standing
      epistemological distinction between ‘essences’ and ‘appearances’, as well as ‘essences’
      and‘representation’.Arepresentationmirroringtheessentialcoordinatesofanobserved
      fact, idea, or systemic pattern would be deemed to be a true or accurate representation.
      Conversely,aninaccuraterepresentationwouldbeconsideredtobeafalserepresentation.
      The Marxian notion of ‘false consciousness’ famously falls under the latter category.
      Ideologywas,byextension,understoodtobean‘inverted’(i.e.,false)representationof
      reality: The ideas of the ruling class prevented the working class from acknowledging
      their‘true’conditionsofexistence.Emancipationwouldbyextensionentailaprocessof
      ‘alignment’betweenapresumablyessentialrealityandworkingclassconsciousness(‘as
      class for itself’). In contemporary politics, we are seeing novel manifestations of this
      logic,namely,people’sdecisiontoabstainfromvotingbecause‘politicianssayonething
      butdoanother’.Inthissense,whatpoliticianssayareseenasfalserepresentationsofwhat
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      4                             Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      theydo.Butthequestionshouldberaised:Doesthisperspective,whichfocusesonthe
      principle of rational and/or empirical verification, preclude us from other modes of
      epistemic inquiry?                                     
        Letusproceedbycontrastingtwodivergentunderstandingsof‘truth’.Thefirstisthe
      correspondence theory of truth, as outlined above: Any fact, object, idea, or process is
      governedbyaninherentessencethatcanfindanaccurateandunadulteratedexpressionin
      intelligible thoughtor language. The pragmatic perspective (James, 1922), on the other
      hand,understandstruthintermsofutilityandeffect:Therelevanceofthepolitician’slie
      does not only concern its empirical verifiability, but the effects that it engenders.
      Pragmatism gave a much-needed impetus to epistemological outlooks that had already
      beenbrewinginearlysociology,whichultimatelyfoundtheirutmostexpressioninsocial
      constructivism vis-a`-vis the dual input of phenomenology and symbolic interactionism
      (Berger and Luckmann 1966; Blumer, 1969; Mead, 1962; Schutz, 1967).
        RejectingtheprinciplesofRealismandIdealism,constructivistsholdthat‘reality’and
      thus‘truth’donotlieinanobjective‘external’realm‘waitingtobediscovered’.Rather,
      ‘truth’ is culturally constructed through the mediation of symbolic exchanges between
      agents. A low salary can be seen by one person as ‘opportunity’ and by another as
      ‘exploitation’, depending on their respective social standpoints. Neither evaluation is
      ‘truer’, in the strict sense of the term, but socially constructed cultural precepts that are
      disseminatedinthesocialfabric.Theimplicationtobedrawnasfarasourunderstanding
      of representation goes is that, from a pragmatic standpoint, representations are not
      evaluatedintermsoftheirideationalcoherence,ortheircorrespondencetoanobjective
      reality, but in terms of the social and political effects that they engender.
        Pragmatic and constructivist readings of reality have increasingly penetrated con-
      temporarysocialandpoliticalthoughtand,despiteepistemologicaldivergences,foundan
      effectivecounterpartinthepost-foundationaltenetsofpoststructuralistandpostmodern
      thought (see Critchley et al., 1996; Shalin, 1993). The poststructuralist turn in con-
      temporary social and political thought is rooted in the sequential destabilization of es-
      sentialist reasoning in formal scholarship. While I cannot be exhaustive in the present
      article, I will identify what I consider to be some of the key theoretical ‘moments’ that
      introduceddisruptiveeffectswithinthedominantessentialistparadigmthathaslongheld
      the distinction between ‘essence’ and (false) ‘representation’.
        Relevanttheoreticalbreakthroughswereadvancedinthephenomenologicaltradition
      with the work of Husserl (1980) who blurred the distinction between ‘essence’ and
      ‘appearance’,throughhisnotionof‘phenomena’.Theimplicationhereisthat‘essences’,
      to the extent that they do exist, can only be accessed through their phenomenal ap-
      pearance,whichis‘adorned’by‘doxa’(commonsenseknowledge).Theimplicationsthat
      werealreadygerminatinginphenomenologicalthoughtwouldfindtheirmostdeveloped
      expression in the work of Heidegger (1999) who, being guided Nietzsche’s anti-
      essentialist assault (see Heidegger, 1977) asserted that essences could only manifest
      through language. In this sense, language was understood as an ontological plane that
      enabled the presencing of Being—the ontological, as such. Language was thus under-
      stood,notmerelyasanadornmentofessences,butassomethingthatallowsanessenceto
      come into appearance. The appearance that essences assume, however, manifest

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                      5      
                                                             
                                                             
      according to the hermeneutic structure, which is invariably historically embedded and
      subject to flux. ‘Essences’, thus appear differentially in each historic epoch.
        The Heideggerian assault on classical metaphysics would find its most effective
      counterpart in contemporary linguistics and poststructuralism (see Derrida, 1993). The
      linguistic take on reality asserts that reality, being, existence, etc. is not only channeled
      through, but constituted through language (Laclau Ernesto, 2007a). These efforts were
      pioneeredbytheworkofFerdinanddeSaussure(1966)whodemonstratedthatthereare
      nopositivetermsinlanguage,inthesensethatnolinguistictermcanbeunderstoodsolely
      in reference to itself. Language is composed by a series of shifting signs that are only
      intelligibleintermsoftheiroppositionalandassociationaldifference—forexample,Iam
      amanbecauseIamnotawoman,becauseIamafather,becauseIamabrother,becauseI
      dress and behave in ‘masculine’ ways, etc. In this sense, what something is cannot be
      reducedtoanypresumed‘internalessentialcore’.Rather,itsidentityreflectsthetotalsum
      ofitslinguisticandthereforemeaningfulassociations,whichareinvariablyunstableand
      subject to flux (see Laclau Ernesto, 2007a). By extension, ‘representation’ is not to be
      understoodasan‘attempt’toeitherreplicateorexpressanysortofunderlyingessenceor
      coherentstructure,butasthatwhichconstitutestheveryidentityoffacts,ideas,objects,or
      processes. As Laclau and Mouffe succinctly articulate it
        There are not two planes, one of essences and the other of appearances, since there is no
        possibilityoffixinganultimateliteralsenseforwhichthesymbolicwouldbeasecondand
        derived plane of signification. Society and social agents lack any essence, and their regu-
        laritiesmerelyconsistoftherelativeandprecariousformsoffixationwhichaccompanythe
        establishment of acertain order(Laclau andMouffe 2001, 98).
        Reality,therefore,isrepresentation,whetherweunderstandrepresentationintermsof
      languageorcommunicationmedia(seeHall,1997).Assessedfromthisperspective,the
      totality of language, and therefore representations, is not seen as an epiphenomenal
      expression of underlying essences, but as an ontological ground through which social
      reality is constituted.                                
        A caveat here is warranted. The poststructuralist ‘assault’ on essentialism (and
      classical metaphysics more broadly) is gravely misinterpreted and misconstrued, by
      proponentsandcriticsalike(Critchleyetal.,1996;Latour,2004).Poststructuralismdoes
      notconsistinacruderejectionof‘truth’,norrecourseintoana¨ıveconstructionistlogic,
      purportingthatallstandpointsare‘equal’because‘everythingismadeup’(seeLaclauand
      Mouffe 1987, 85-86). Rather, poststructuralism directs attention to the inherent limita-
      tionsoftruthverificationclaims(andbyextensionscience).Theissueconcerns,notthe
      existence of truth, as such, but whether there can be seamless correspondence between
      ‘observation/thought’and‘language’,giventheinherentpropertiesoflanguage(Laclau
      and Mouffe 1987).                                      
        This is one of the fundamental points of divergence between constructivists, which
      adhere to an interpretivist understanding of reality (and thus scientific empiricism), and
      poststructuralists, which emphasize the inherent limits of scientific observation on ac-
      count of language’s inherent ambiguity. As thoroughly demonstrated by contemporary
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      6                             Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      linguistics and poststructuralism, language is fundamentally undercut by rhetorical di-
      mensionsthatundermineliterality(Barthes,1972;Jakobson,2003;Lacan,2006;Laclau,
      2014). In short, the inherent polysemy of meaningful terms invokes symbolic repre-
      sentations that exceed what is denoted. As an example, if I say that ‘nuclear weapons
      safeguard thesecurity of thenation’, Iamnotmerelydenoting apresumable ‘fact’, but
      symbolicallyinvoking,amongothers,awholearrayofnormativeassumptionsaboutthe
      social and political ordering of the nation-state: That a presumably undivided people
      defined according to national criteria occupies a delimited and historically identifiable
      territory,whoseadministrativeworkingsaretaskedtothestate,whichhasthelegitimate
      functionofsecuringthesurvivalofthenationalcommunitythroughmilitarytechnology.
      Thisiswhatpoststructuralistsmeanwhentheysaythatthereisan‘excess’inlanguage
      that cannot be grounded in literal representation. Ergo, as a proponent of nuclear non-
      proliferation,Imaycontestthevalidityofthestatement‘nuclearweaponssafeguardthe
      securityofthenation’byinvokingtheinherentdangersofnuclearweaponsandthethreat
      ofanuclearholocaust. Ihave contestedwhatisdenoted. However, myargumentisnot
      exhaustive,preciselybecauseitdoesnotaddresstheunderlyingandunsaidnarrativesthat
      underpin the initial line of argumentation—its hidden structure will elude my counter-
      offensive, limiting its efficacy.                      
        The same limitations are evident when assessing the validity of political discourses
      fromascientificstandpoint.WhenDonaldTrumpsaysthatmigrantswillwalkintoyour
      kitchenandcutyourthroat,Icanonacolloquiallevelcallbullshit.Icaneveninvokethe
      logicofstatisticalreasoning,whichseesnocausalrelationshipbetweenimmigrationand
      violent crimes. But as forms of contestation, both approaches are bound to encounter
      limits. Trump’s statement, strictly speaking, is not amenable to scientific scrutiny, on
      account of its rhetorical modularity: Which migrants are we talking about? Are we
      referring to a specific racial, ethnic, religious, economic category? Does the ‘threat’
      involvethecaseofone,several,alot,allmigrants?Doesthestatementinvokeageneral
      tendency,aspecificevent,anindividualpremonition?Trump’sstatement,insidiousasit
      is,isplaguedwith‘vagueness’,perhapsintentionallyso,thuseludingscientificscrutiny,
      which presupposes propositional specification. And therein lies its political utility.
        This discussion reveals the full thrust of the poststructuralist critique: If reality is
      channeled through language and language is inherently ambiguous on account of po-
      lysemyand‘rhetoricalmodularity’,observationcannotbesubjecttoapodicticmodesof
      verification (Laclau, 2014). The appeal here to the intricacies of language does not
      invalidate empiricism. It reinforces and renews it by broadening its operational scope,
      allowinganalyststopeerdeeperintothehiddenstructuresthatunderpinrepresentations
      (Anastasiou, 2022; Laclau Ernesto, 2007a; Laclau and Mouffe, 2001). This enables
      inquiry into the latter’s condition of possibility, as well as the effects they exercise,
      without invalidating the question of empirical verifiability, which can of course be ad-
      dressedfromwithinparticulardiscursivelocations(e.g.,scientificmethods).Aneffective
      deconstruction of Trumpian rhetoric, for instance, allows us to (a) decode its political
      appeal,byrevealingitsunderlyingrepresentationalstructure;(b)decipherhowandwhy
      itshiddenrepresentationalintricaciesneutralizeattemptsofresistance;(c)considerhow
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                      7      
                                                             
                                                             
      thesocio-historicalcontextenablesandfortifiesitasapoliticalpossibility;and(d)assess
      or even predict its political effects.                 
        This renewed empirical orientation opens up epistemic possibilities that are directly
      related to the question of politics and power, allowing us to resituate the relevance of
      empiricism within the framework of contemporary socio-political developments and
      challenges. Given thatmyultimategoal istoimpart aneffectivecritique of‘post-truth’
      politics, it is paramount to proceed by investigating the relationship between repre-
      sentation, politics, and power.                        
      III Representation, politics, and power                
                                                             
      The fundamental premise to be deduced from the preceding discussion is that the total
      sum of social experience is constituted through language, which is inherently repre-
      sentational. As perceptive schemas, representations operate as social and political
      compassesthatdirecthumanbehavior,values,andattitudes.Theyareimplicated,through
      andthrough,inoureverydaydecisions,conceptionsof‘theself’and‘theother’andinthe
      structuration of subjectivities (Hall, 1997). They formulate distinctions and boundaries,
      directemotions,incubatedesires,fosterworld-views,andanimatecorporealsubjectivities
      insocialandpoliticalactivity(Ahmed,2014;Butler,2011;GlynosandStavrakakis2008;
      Hall, 1997).                                           
        Politics, which involve the ordering of social relations, hinge on the articulation of
      representations, such that they result in the uneven distribution of power (Hall, 1997;
      Laclau and Mouffe 2001). Semiotics and discourse theory, more generally, have been
      particularly effective in revealing the (often hidden) political underpinnings of repre-
      sentations, carving out novel paths for epistemic and critical inquiry (Hall, 1997).
      Theoretical concepts associated with this tradition, such as ‘stereotyping’, ‘othering’,
      ‘naturalizing’,etc.,havebeenremarkablyfruitfulinthisregardandhavesincepenetrated
      everyday political discourse and emancipatory politics.
        But how do particular representations become dominant and how do they overcome
      oppositional cultural and political currents? This question has been at the center of
      poststructuralist inquiry, which has effectively decoded the subversive qualities of
      representationbypeeringintotherelationshipbetween‘particularity’and‘universality’
      (LaclauandMouffe2001).Inshort,representationsbecomeculturallydominantwhen‘a
      part’iseffectivelyconstructedandsociallydisseminatedasarepresentationof‘awhole’.
      Byobfuscating the constitutive plurality ofthesocialworld,these total representations
      direct or subsume oppositional cultural currents by effectuating a world in accordance
      with their image.                                      
        Let me proceed with some anecdotal considerations. Upon returning to my home
      country from North America, where I had lived for twelve years, nearly all of my ac-
      quaintanceswereshockedatmydecisiontoreturn.Iwas,timeandtimeagainmetwith
      the following trite encounter: ‘Why did you come back? I would have never chosen to
      come back’! In their minds, the U.S. constituted an ideal, where one could potentially
      haveunmitigatedaccesstodiverseprofessionalprospects,highincome,arichsociallife,
      entertainment,etc.Granted,therewasjustsome‘truth’totheirestimations,buttheywere
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      8                             Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      certainly and fundamentally incomplete. When compared to other developed countries,
      theU.S.topsthelistonawidearrayofsocialproblems,notleastpovertyrates.Sociallife
      canoftenbedeficient,particularlyinurbancentersduetoalackofstablecommunitiesand
      thedominanceofindividualism.Stablesocialrelationshipsareoftenhardtocomebydue
      to the U.S.’s incredible social dynamism and geographical mobility, etc.
        Interestingly,itwasnotthecasethatmyacquaintanceswereunawareofthedeficient
      aspects of U.S. society. They did, nonetheless, espouse a perspective that was closely
      associatedwiththeso-called‘Americandream’.Wecanthusverywellstatethatcertain
      ‘positive’aspectsoftheU.S.had‘trumped’(punintended!)its‘negative’aspects.So,in
      essence,oneformofrepresentationhadsupersededandsubvertedothers.Asanoutcome,
      particular representations of the U.S. had come to represent it as a totality. These total
      representations were ‘generalized’ beyond their ‘origin’, thus ‘overriding’ other (op-
      positional) representations. In this sense, ‘a part’ had come to represent ‘the whole’, a
      process coinciding with Laclau and Mouffe’s (2001) definition of hegemony.
        Asvariousworkshaveshown,thisrepresentationalmodality—therhetoricalformof
      synecdoche—inheres in the very logic of language (Laclau, 2014; Stavrakakis, 2014,
      506).Whatinterestsme,however,arethevariouspowereffectsthatareanimatedbysuch
      processes of representation. Let us reconsider the case of the U.S. The U.S. is a highly
      pluralisticsociety,beinggovernedbyethnic,linguistic,racial,class,etc.diversity.Yetthe
      nominalcategory‘American’representsallidentitiesasiftheywereequivalent(Laclau
      andMouffe2001,127–34).Theinvocationofthenationalidentity(i.e.,American)thus
      overshadows society’s constitutive plurality. But does the total representation of
      ‘American’serve, to a greater extent, the interests of particular groups? When MAGA
      aficionados invoke the notion of the ‘real American’, as an example, they implicitly
      invoke a ‘nativist’ conception of identity symbolically associated with whiteness, thus
      subverting outlooks, identities and political demands tied to cultural plurality.
        Theeffectsthatareenabledbythisactofrepresentationaremultidimensional.Asjust
      one example, a voter might be less likely to vote for a black woman for Congress,
      preciselybecausetherepresentationofthe‘blackwoman’mightbeperceived,onsome
      level,eitherconsciouslyorunconsciously,asbeingincompatiblewith‘American’.These
      arethediscursivelogicsatplaythatunderlie(implicit)formsofdiscrimination.Butitis
      important to note that representations are interwoven in a very complex fashion with
      multilayered perceptive schemas. For many U.S. citizens, ‘American’ might be sym-
      bolically equivalent with ‘unfettered capitalism’, ‘individual liberty’, ‘American ex-
      ceptionalism’, ‘strong military’, etc. In other words, the hegemonic representations that
      constitutepeople’sperceptionscometoreferencedifferentialschemasandlifemodalities
      that are presumably equivalent with the category that symbolizes the totality, that is,
      ‘American’.                                            
        Thetotalsumofthese representationsconjureupwhatmightbecalledahegemonic
      worldpicture,thatis,aparticularorderingofperceptionsandthereforeactions,according
      to dominant forms of representation that come to be saturated with affect (Stavrakakis,
      2007;Z ˇ izˇek, 1993).I should beclear thatIusethetermhegemonic to emphasize that
      these dominant representations speak, to a larger extent, to the interests of particular
      identities. One can very easily see, as an example, how the association of ‘American

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                      9      
                                                             
                                                             
      interests’ with ‘military intervention’ serves the economic interests of the military
      industrialcomplex.Goingbacktomyacquaintances’reactionuponmyreturntomyhome
      country, one can say that they desired to live in the U.S. because of particular represen-
      tationsthat,byvirtueofvariousfactors(e.g.,globalandsocialmedia)hadcometodominate
      perceptionsbeyondtheU.S.:TheU.S.appearedas‘thelandofopportunity’.Ahegemonic
      worldpicturehadthuscometomaterializeand,byextension,animatepeople’sperceptions
      and actions. The effective dissemination and, therefore, hegemonization of this world
      pictureisoneoftheprincipalenginesthatdrivesAmericaneconomicinterests,forexample,
      the U.S. fashion, entertainment, technology industries, etc.
        This discussion reveals that the incubation of political desires hinges on the gener-
      alization oftotalrepresentations.Bysubvertingoppositionalideas,totalrepresentations
      effectuate a steering of political imaginaries and desires that can be leveraged in the
      interestsofparticularpolitical,economic,andsocialfactions.Theeffectivegeneralization
      oftotalrepresentations—aprocessthatisdefactounderpinnedbyrhetoricallogic—thus
      results in the constitution of power relations. As a theoretical leeway, this discussion
      allows us to situate the coordinates of ‘post-truth’ politics in a new light, directing at-
      tention to their underlying rhetorical and hegemonic underpinnings.
      IVPost-truth,the digital publicsphere, and artificial intelligence
      Thepresentsectionsituatestheabove-noteddeductionswithintheframeworkofcurrent
      and anticipated socio-political developments connected to advancements in digital
      technologies and (generative) Artificial Intelligence (AI). ‘Post-truth’ has recently
      emergedasaprimeissueofpoliticalcontention,receivingscholarly(McIntyre,2018),as
      well as journalistic scrutiny (Davis, 2017; D’Ancona, 2017).
        Conventionalreadingssuggestthat,particularlyoverthepastdecade,therehasbeena
      seismic epistemic shift (Hoggan-Kloubert and Hoggan 2023). The legitimacy of expert
      knowledge, the scientific medium and factual verification, as bases for truth are in-
      creasingly being undermined. In their stead, what is making sway is the profuse cir-
      culationof‘disinformation’,‘fakenews’,and‘conspiracytheories’(Conradetal.,2023;
      Iyengar and Massey 2019).                              
        Thishasresultedinanassociatedbacklash,fromscholarsandpoliticalinstitutionalists,
      whichadvocatefortherestorationoftruthstandardswithrecoursetorationality,science,
      education, effective governance, and citizen responsibility (Barton, 2019; Hoggan-
      Kloubert and Hoggan 2023; Lazer et al., 2018; McIntyre, 2018). Relatedly, defenders
      ofscientificorthodoxyhavemadeconcentratedattemptsinassociating‘post-truth’with
      the rise of populism (e.g., Dahlgren, 2018, 24; Suiter, 2016). As Venizelos (2024, 92)
      suggests, ‘This alarmist trend was accelerated with the “double shock” of the BREXIT
      referendumintheUKandtheelectionofDonaldTrumpintheUSin2016,andreceiveda
      further boost with the COVID-19 healthcare crisis—during which “populism” was as-
      sociated with anti-science positions, vaccine skepticism and so on’.
        Thesediscussionsconventionallyfocusontheeffectsofdigitallymediatedexchanges
      betweenagentswithinawidearrayofnoveldigitalinstruments,includingsocialmedia,
      onlineforums,onlineblogs,andsoon(Dahlgren,2018;Salgado,2018).Theinternet,ina
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      10                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      sense,isidentifiedasthe‘originalculprit’,thatis,astheprime-mostformoftechnology
      facilitating post-truth. The argument holds that the transition from traditional mass, to
      socialmedia,createscompetingpublicspheresthatareemployingdivergentstandardsof
      truth verification (Habermas, 2023). Contrary to traditional media, which rely on pro-
      fessional staff and experts for establishing truth standards, social media platforms in
      principleempoweralluserstobeindependentand‘equal’authors,intheabsenceoffact
      verificationstandards(Habermas,2023).Correspondingly,thecirculationofinformation
      and discourses with unpredictable, unverifiable and even harmful content proliferates
      (Habermas,2023).Notsurprisingly,thesedevelopmentshaveaddedlayersofcomplexity
      to discussions about epistemic democratization (Dahlgren, 2018; Fuller, 2016; Latour,
      2004; Sismondo, 2017).                                 
        TheconversationhasbeenfurtheramplifiedbytheonslaughtofautomatedAIsystems
      thathavebeenstealthilyembeddedinawidearrayofdigitalinstruments,notleastsocial
      mediaplatforms,which,usingavarietyoftechniqueseffectivelyframeusers’experience,
      ifnotnefariouslydirectingusers’behavior(Zuboff,2019;Pasquale,2015;Elliott,2022,
      12-13).Thenotionof‘algorithmicgovernmentality’provestobeparticularlyeffectivein
      revealing the associated socio-political effects (Rouvroy and Berns 2013). By con-
      structinguser‘digitaldoubles’aroundawidecollectionofdatapoints,onlineplatforms
      seektomaximizeengagementwiththebroaderaimofleveraginguserengagementforad
      revenue.Theseprocessesarenotunderpinnedbyanyunderlyingcommitmentto‘truth’or
      ‘ethics’, but by capital accumulation imperatives: Anything is fair game so long as ad
      revenue increases.                                     
        Itistruethattherehavebeenattemptsbyvarioussocialmediaplatformstointroduce
      content moderation standards. However, content moderation has only been marginally
      effective in fending off ‘disinformation’ campaigns, not least hate speech, which often
      manifestsinanimplicitfashion,undertheguiseof‘freespeech’.Tocitearelevantreallife
      example,FacebookhasbeenremarkablyintransigentinremovingpoststhatIhavefound
      to be blatantly erroneous and clear examples of hate speech. In other words, content
      moderation standards are themselves subject to interpretation, if not underpinned by
      ideological commitments. What is more, social media platforms are increasingly at-
      tenuatingmoderationstandards,asevidencedbyX,followingElonMusk’stakeover,and
      Facebook, following Donald Trump’s election. In other words, there emerges no con-
      sensusinthedigitalpublicsphereastowhatconstitutes‘truth’,orevenwhatthestandards
      for establishing ‘truth’ should be. What is consequently effectuated is an uneven cir-
      culation of free-flowing information that is constantly proliferating and which yields
      divergent ‘truth’standards.                            
        The impetus of predictive AI systems is at the same time fostering what is often
      referred to as ‘echo chambers’ (see Terren and Borge 2021), where users are directed
      towardsspecificdigitalcontentonthebasisoftheirdigitaldataprofile.Thisoccursinthe
      formofcontentrecommendation,ads,notifications,etc.whicharepredicatedonthe‘rank
      and file’ logic of predictive AI systems. In essence, an automated hierarchy of recom-
      mendationsisprovidedtousers,basedontheirpresumed‘preferences’.Thisveryoften
      resultsina‘feedbackloop’thatreinforcesuserproclivities,wherebyusersaredirectedto
      ‘digital chambers’ that mirror their beliefs, preferences, and biases. Conversely, user

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     11      
                                                             
                                                             
      engagement with alternative or competing narratives is curtailed. These processual
      dynamicsareveryoftenthoughttofacilitateextremismandpolarization(HongandKim
      2016; McCoy, Rahman, and Somer 2018), fostering what is sometimes referred to as
      ‘fragmented’ digital public spheres (Habermas, 2023).  
        ThissituationisfurtherexacerbatedbythewideavailabilityofgenerativeAIsystems,
      which make possible the seamless generation of (often remarkably realistic) digital
      content (image, audio, text, and video). This has led to a further proliferation of in-
      formationflowsinthedigitalpublicsphere,oftenintheformofhighlycontestedmaterial,
      including ‘deep fakes’. These ‘digital tokens’ are circulated as either affirmations of
      particulartruthclaims,orascounter-truthstootherwiseestablishedtruthclaims.Butitis
      importanttonotethat,giventheincreasingcirculationofinformationinthedigitalpublic
      sphere,truthclaimscanonlyproliferate.Thiscanmeannothingelsethanthebroadening
      of the field of political contestation, something that has been registered in recent dis-
      cussions on the ‘digital culture wars’ (Finlayson et al., 2022).
        Discourse theory can offer illuminating insight to the above-noted social trends, by
      peeringintothequalitativeaspectsofdigitalcommunicationtechnologies,whichinvolve
      the complexification of representation. A key contribution of poststructuralist discourse
      theory concerns the floating nature of signs, in the sense that meaning is not fully
      subsumed by its relational context (Laclau and Mouffe 2001, 111–14). It ‘resist’ being
      fully grounded within a particular discursive ‘location’ and is thus subject to re-
      articulations. Consider, as an example, how the term ‘Jesus’ might play out in the
      digitalpublicsphere.Asarepresentation,itisatoncefirmlyembeddedwithinthespiritual
      tradition of Christianity, but its discursive ‘excess’ allows it to be reframed in myriad
      novel directions: ‘Jesus’ can be recast as an enemy within atheist chatrooms, it can be
      recastasanoblereferenceinChristianheavymetalsongsonSpotify,itcanberecastasa
      popularmemelikenedtoChuckNorris,itcanappearasakeysignifierinAI-generated
      music videos of Barron Trump, etc. In other words, the level of empirical expedience
      (Anastasiou, 2024) enabled by digitalities allows for a productive proliferation and
      circulation of representations associated with ‘Jesus’.
        This,atonce,yieldstwopossibilities:(a)themeaningof‘Jesus’becomesincreasingly
      ambiguousandthrownintoflux,asitbecomesall-the-morepolysemic;and(b)‘Jesus’can
      effectively ‘capture’ all the more meaningful complexes, as its symbolic chain of
      equivalence broadens in scope. This dual possibility potentiates various types of rhe-
      torical constructions, including synecdochic representations, where ‘a part’ comes to
      represent‘thewhole’:‘Jesus’,asaparticularrepresentation,cansymbolicallyconsolidate
      a larger symbolic gamut by symbolically circumscribing it (Laclau, 2007b, 2014). The
      politicaldeploymentof‘Jesus’willthusnotonlysymbolicallyinvokeaspiritualtradition,
      but,potentially,abroadrangeoffree-floatingmeaningful-affectiverepresentationsinthe
      form of digital content (music, memes, AI-generated images and videos, tweets, etc.).
      ‘Jesus’canthusemergeasatotalrepresentationforthesedigitaldisparities.Thisprocess
      isdefacto‘post-truth’inthesensethattheinvocationof‘Jesus’,asatotalrepresentation,
      by default encapsulates a broad range of representations that do not conform to con-
      ventional truth verification standards. They can include poetic representations, vague
      argumentativelogics,unsubstantiatedcorrelations,half-truths,conspiracytheories,deep

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      12                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      fakes,scientificdenialisms,etc.Inotherwords,rhetoric,asamodalityofrepresentation
      implicated in the consolidation of symbolic (digital) disparities, exceeds, by its very
      nature, the propositional specificity that scientific standards presuppose (see ‘Repre-
      sentation in Social and Political Thought’ section). Total representations are symbolic
      me´langes that do not follow standards of rationality—they can consolidate representa-
      tionsofanysort,whether‘rational’or‘irrational’.Thesepotentialities,ofcourse,donot
      merely involve the term ‘Jesus’, but a broad range of representations that are firmly
      embedded in contemporary political discourse, including, among many others: ‘de-
      mocracy’, ‘nation’, ‘wokism’, ‘freedom’, ‘justice’, ‘gender’, etc. Representations in the
      ageofnovel(AIpowered)digitaltechnologiesarebecomingincreasinglyoverdetermined
      (Althusser, 1967; Freud, 1955; Laclau and Mouffe 2001).
        Thesepremisesallowustosituatethesignificanceof‘post-truth’politicswithinnovel
      epistemic inquiries, which center, not on the question of factual validity, but on the
      question of political efficacy. There is growing discussion lately concerning the con-
      ceptualausterityofpoliticalcommunication.Politicalleaders,aswellasordinaryfolkin
      theircapacity asonline‘contentcreators’areincreasinglyemployingslogan-like (total)
      representations that bypass conventional standards of ‘rationality’ and ‘science’, by
      conceptually exceeding propositional and argumentative specificity. Political slogans
      such as ‘Make America Great Again’, ‘immigrants go home’, ‘#metoo’, ‘Black Lives
      Matter’, and ‘All Lives Matter’, all reflect this logic. As do conceptually austere dis-
      cussions,memes,AI-generatedcontent,etc.thatfollowobscureargumentativepathsthat
      hark back to presumable ‘enemies’ vis-a`-vis the neo-platitudes of ‘wokism’, ‘cultural
      Marxism’, and ‘gender ideology’. I have attempted to invoke examples from multiple
      sidesofthepoliticaldivide,butitisthecasethattheimpetustowardsthe‘sloganization’
      of politics is driven in larger part by the political Far Right.
        The sloganization of politics is conventionally critiqued by appeals to ‘objectivity’,
      ‘rationality’, and ‘science’, a practice replete in Left-wing and particularly Liberal
      discourse. The prime political strategy consists in casting the Far Right as a politically
      irrationalactorthatissteepedinemotion,lies,andextremism(Venizelos,2024,103).We
      allsawhowthislineofcontentionplayedoutintherecentU.S.elections.Indeed,Donald
      Trumpmanagedtomaterializeamoderatelydecisivewin,despiterepeatedlybeingcastas
      aliar.Wecandebatethe(non)truthbasisofTrump’sclaimsalldaylong,butthatistomiss
      thebroaderpicturewithregardtothepoliticallogicunderpinningtheFarRight’spolitical
      ascent. In an increasingly technologically inter-connected world (Castells, 2009; Rosa,
      2013), where the free-flow of information proliferates vis-a`-vis automated AI systems
      (Kalpokas, 2019), truth claims are increasingly rhetorically modulated on account of
      representational complexity and ambiguity. What becomes politically effective in this
      context is not ‘rational’ contestation, but the employment of highly formalized repre-
      sentations that operate not against representational complexity, but through it. As
      Chantal Mouffe so aptly articulates                    
        Itisparticularlyimportantinthepresentconjuncture,characterizedasitisbyanincreasing
        disaffectiontowardsdemocracy,tounderstandhowastrongadhesiontodemocraticvalues
        and institutions can be established and that rationalism constitutes an obstacle to such
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     13      
                                                             
                                                             
        understanding. It is necessaryto realize that itis not byoffering sophisticated rational ar-
        guments nor by making context-transcendent truth claims about the superiority of liberal
        democracy that democratic values can be fostered. The creation of democratic forms of
        individuality is a question of identification with democratic values and this is a complex
        process that takes place through a diversity of practices, discourses and language games.
        (Mouffe,1996,5)                                      
        Thenameofthegameisrhetoric,which,fromthestandpointofsemiotics,involvesthe
      consolidation of meaningful complexes through processes of representational ‘simpli-
      fication’(Laclau,2014).Consider,asanexample,howexcludedpopulationsoftenappeal
      tothenotionof‘thepeople’asatotalrepresentationtoadvanceparticularisticdemocratic
      claims. In so doing, the excluded population is not cast as an ‘outsider’ wanting ‘in-
      clusion’,butasarepresentativeof‘thepeople’asawhole(Stavrakakis,2014,506).This
      mode of contestation does not appeal to the complexity of experience, to the minute
      details of public policy, nor does it appeal explicitly to the factual realities of historical
      oppression.Itpiercesthroughthesemeaningfulnuancesbyappropriatinglarger-than-life
      andaffect-riddenrepresentationsthatareembodiedinthereferentof‘thepeople’.Most
      importantly, it is the conceptual ambiguity of ‘the people’, as a representation of the
      ‘plebeian part’ and the ‘communal whole’ that enables contingent political alignments
      between excluded and included populations.             
        Asaveryimportantcaveat,Ishouldhereemphasizethattotalrepresentationsdonot
      effacerepresentationalcomplexity,whichis,onsomelevel,embodiedin‘themessage’.
      Rather, representational complexity is partially subverted as it facilitates what Roland
      Barthes (1972, 113) calls a ‘2nd order semiological system’. A 2nd order semiological
      system emerges by ‘piggy-backing’ on existing representations. Much like the order of
      ‘supplementation’,asdetailedbyDerrida(2001),itsubvertsitsmeaningfulpredicatesby
      conjuringupnovelrepresentationsthatemergefrontandcenter.Thiscanonlymeanthat
      representationalcomplexityand,thus,ambiguity,aretheconditionofpossibilityoftotal
      representations. As Barthes (1972, 120) notes, with reference to the rhetorical order of
      myth,‘paradoxicalitmayseem,mythhidesnothing:itsfunctionistodistort,nottomake
      disappear’.                                            
        Theexacerbationofrepresentationalambiguityinthedigitalpublicsphereoccasions
      modalitiesofcompetitionthatcenteron‘thecontrolofpoliticallanguage’ina‘questfor
      finality and decisiveness’ (Freeden, 2013, 22, 72). In this quest, rhetoric—and total
      representations in particular—can be an incredibly effective political compass, by
      contingently fixing the meaning of representations. They can reinforce a ‘fantasy of
      mastery and coherence’ and endow ‘the world with seemingly undeniable sense and
      purpose’ (Kalpokas, 2019, 4). Seen in this light, the utility of rhetoric proves to be a
      particularlypotentpoliticaltool,being,inasense,the‘antidote’tothecomplexificationof
      representation in the digital public sphere.           
        Rhetorical formalism has the added potential of symbolically consolidating diverse
      political demands, which may be associated, divergent and even ‘contradictory’. In his
      variousdiscussionsofpolitics,Laclau(2005,2014,2007b)hashighlightedhowrhetoric,
      particularlyintheformoftotalrepresentationscanoperateasasymbolic‘replacement’
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      14                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      for heterogeneous demands, thus fostering a ‘chain of equivalence’ between otherwise
      disparateidentities.Thepoliticalsuccessof‘BlackLivesMatter’reflectsthisunderlying
      logic. The rhetorical formalism of ‘Black Lives Matter’, as a total representation,
      consolidated abroadrange of heterogeneous identities that werenotnecessarily from a
      ‘factual’standpointvictimsofracializedpoliceviolence.Itbecamea‘rhetoricalplatform’
      thatcametoexpressavarietyofgrievancesinvolvingnotonlyracializedpoliceviolence,
      butbroaderissuesofjustice.Thesymbolic‘chainofequivalence’of‘BlackLivesMatter’
      cut through the digital public sphere, incorporating identities and discourses of justice
      from all around the globe. It emerged as a decisive, incisive, not least divisive ‘world
      picture’ that facilitated in the most radical way the consolidation of convergent and
      divergent democratic imaginaries.                      
        Itbecomesclearthatintheageofdigitalcommunicationand(generative)AI,whichis
      characterizedbyimmediacyincommunication,appealstoconventionsofrationalismand
      empiricismhavemarginalutilityinconsolidatingpoliticalcapital.Thisisthekeypremise
      established in this article, both on epistemological grounds, as detailed in previous
      sections, as well as onsociological grounds, asdetailedinthe present section. Inshort,
      ‘truth’,asapoliticalconstructionthatexercisessocialeffects,isestablishedwithinvaried
      powergamesthatunfoldthroughtheemploymentofrhetoric,involvingveryoftentotal
      representations that disproportionately benefit some identities to the expense of others
      (hegemony).                                            
        Inlightoftheseobservations,itwouldnotbeanexaggerationtosuggestthatwewere
      always‘post-truth’,butthatthedimensionof‘post-truth’,asapoliticalpracticeinscribed
      inrhetoricalpossibilitiesacquiresallthemorepoliticalpowerinthecontemporarydigital
      milieu. This realization does not consist in an endorsement of ‘post-truth’, but in a
      theoretical and empirical deduction that outpours from the very logic of contemporary
      socio-political developments. Thus, an effective democratic counter-offensive to Far
      Right‘post-truth’politicswouldentailthearticulation ofnovelhegemoniccoordinates,
      whereby‘totalrepresentations’arearticulatedinaccordancewithdemocraticprinciples,
      desires, and imaginaries. What is necessitated is the articulation of a democratic world
      picture.                                               
      V Conclusion: Democracy in a post-truth era            
      In his 2018 monograph, Post-Truth, Lee McIntyre advances a brazen polemic against
      postmodernism,whichheidentifiesastherootofFarRightpost-truthpolitics.Inhisown
      words:‘Whatwouldanapplicationofpostmodernismtopost-truthpoliticslooklike?It
      looks a lot like the world we now inhabit’ (McIntyre, 2018, 144). McIntyre’s key ar-
      gumentisthatpostmodernistcritiquesofobjectivityandscienceopenedthefloodgatesfor
      an anti-scientific (Far Right) advance. While the text does not provide a systematic
      examination of postmodernism, it does present some convincing arguments that are
      predicated on three empirical highlights.              
        The first zeroes in on Phillip Johnson’s postmodernist sensibilities, which, admittedly,
      facilitatedhisroleasoneofthefoundersof‘IntelligentDesign’(McIntyre,2018,136–41).
      ThesecondandmoststrikingisBrunoLatour’s(2004)famouslamentofscience,which,in
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     15      
                                                             
                                                             
      atwistofirony,advancesacritiqueofconstructivism(McIntyre,2018,141–43).Thethird
      invokes the example of conspiracy theorist and Trump aficionado Mike Cernovich, who
      openlyadmitstohavingreadandtacticallyemployedpostmodernthoughtinhispolitical
      endeavors (McIntyre, 2018, 148–50). Admonishing ‘the Left’ for delving into obscure
      postmodernlogicsandignoringtheirlogicalconclusion,McIntyre(2018,144)directsthe
      following provocative inquiry to the reader: ‘[H]ow does the left fight back against
      rightwingideologywithoutusingfacts?Thisisthecostofplayingwithideasasiftheyhad
      no consequences’.                                      
        I could contest McIntyre on a variety of points, not least his superficial survey of
      postmodernism and his employment of sweeping generalizations under the guise of
      unitary categories (‘the Left’, ‘postmodernists’, etc.). But engaging in a deconstructive
      practiceisnotmypriorityhere.Iwouldliketosituatethediscussionwithintheframework
      of the present article. Let us be explicit here by asking whether post-truth politics need
      postmodernismasan epistemic compass, orwhetherrelativism,asany otherdiscursive
      ‘tool’ can be employed as a political weapon. Consider how appeals to ‘rationality’,
      ‘objectivity’,and‘science’areequallyemployedbyde-democratizingforces.Inarecent
      interview, libertarian-turned-far-right technology mogul Peter Thiel (2025) described
      Trump’sreelectionas‘miraculous’,becauseitcounteredthe‘demographicdeterminism
      ofidentitypolitics,whereyoudonotvotebasedonreasonorargument,butyouvoteon
      subrational factors like your gender, or your race, or your sexual orientation, or, other
      thingslikethat’.WecanadditionallyconsiderhowAIsystemsareincorporatedinawide
      array of state and corporate instruments that are in direct violation of democratic
      principles and fundamental rights: Predictive policing, profiling, surveillance, autono-
      mous lethal weapons, etc. These are the things the Far Right is in love with and all are
      legitimized in the name of science, progress, and objectivity.
        Even more relevant is the Far Right’s unwavering (if not obsessive) commitment to
      essentializedconceptionsoftruthandidentity,whethernational,religious,civilizational,
      gender,etc.Thenationalistand‘anti-woke’offensiveamountstoanexplicitrejectionof
      relativism,whichtheFarRightassociateswithsocialliberalismandpostmodernism.Seen
      from this perspective, postmodernism would correlate to the Far Right’s ‘internal ene-
      my’—a connection that neo-Far Right gurus, such as Jordan Peterson, are never shy to
      make.TheFarRight’soccasionalappealtorelativismisnothingmorethanacontingent
      politicalstrategythatisdiscardedassoonasitceasestobeusefulandwhichinvariably
      harks back to essentialized conceptions of culture and identity. As an example, the in-
      famous Far Right philosopher Aleksandr Dugin has repeatedly disavowed post-
      modernism… in his defense of cultural relativism! In other words, all ‘epistemic
      weapons’canbeemployedintoday’ssocio-digitalmilieu,solongastheyareeffectively
      skewed in the service of particular ideological orientations and particular political
      interests.                                             
        The ‘ease’ by which anything can be distorted towards any ideological direction
      (considerFarRightappealstohumanrightsandfreespeech!)reflectsnothingmorethan
      the overdetermined character of the contemporary digital-and-AI milieu, which has
      dislodgedallrepresentationsfromtheir‘origin’andreshuffledthem.Theoverdetermined
      character of the digital public sphere allows all representations to be decoupled,

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      16                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      reformulated,rhetoricallymodulated,flippedontheirhead,andsoon.Bythesametoken,
      theFarRightisbarredfromanycritiquethatwouldappealtothepresumed‘inconsistency
      ofargumentation’whenitsdiscoursetip-toesbetweenabsolutistandrelativistprinciples.
      Appeals to the ‘internal inconsistency’, ‘contradiction’, and ‘hypocrisy’ of political
      positions bear limited political efficacy when the whole meaningful order is likewise
      subject to flux. In fact, it is the joker-like character of the Far Right that underpins its
      political success. By effectively ‘arresting’ the flow of representations, including dis-
      courses of the Left, and recasting them in accordance with its own principles, the Far
      Righthaseffectivelymanagedtoconstructadiversealliance,rangingfromworkingclass
      actorsto‘technofeudalists’(Varoufakis,2023),inthelikesofElonMuskandPeterThiel.
        Aneffectivecounter-offensivetoFarRightpoliticswould,byextension,bepredicated
      on the socio-political coordinates of the system at play. The creative employment of
      counter-rhetoric, in the service of democratic ideals represents a first step of incision.
      There have been various calls for a democratic populism (Mouffe, 2018; Stavrakakis,
      2014) that would employ populist rhetoric (‘the people’ vs ‘the establishment’) in the
      service ofadvancing democratic ideals.Political parties Podemos(Spain)and SYRIZA
      (Greece)consciouslyemployedthispoliticalstrategy,whichfacilitatedtoaconsiderable
      extenttheirrisetopower(Custodi,2021;StavrakakisandKatsambekis2014).Thecaseof
      Podemosisparticularlyintriguingonaccountofthefactthatitcreativelyemployedanti-
      elitist and patriotic rhetoric fashioned according to democratic values. But alas, demo-
      cratic populism reached its impasse with the concurrent downfall of Podemos and
      SYRIZA, raising important questions about its political limits (see Stavrakakis, 2021).
        Democraticpopulismisnotapanacea.Itis,rather,justonemodeofcontestationthat
      presupposes particular conditions of possibility (Laclau, 2005). In light of this, it is
      necessarytoconsiderthepoliticalutilityofrhetoricbeyondthepopulistlogic—asamode
      of contestation that can be deployed at any time and for whatever purpose. What are
      progressive’s rhetorical responses to Far Right anti-immigrant rhetoric (‘they took our
      jobs’,‘theyrapeandsteal’,‘IslamizationofEurope’)?Whatareprogressive’srhetorical
      responsestodangerouslogicsemployedintheso-called—andrhetoricallyframed—‘race
      toAI’?DowehaveananswertotherhetoricalheuristicsoftheestablishmentandtheFar
      Right, which claim that ‘if we don’t get there first, China will’? Do we have rhetorical
      responses to (often blatantly erroneous) anti-trans logics that assume centrality in the
      impressively effective ‘anti-woke’ offensive? Forget about the intricacies. Give me a
      sling-shot answer that I can remember. The rhetorical stock of democratic forces is
      remarkably austere. Democratic forces are still ensnared in drawn-out analyses and
      discussions that appeal to the principles of ‘internal rationality’ and the intricacies of
      scientific observation. In this regard, ‘seizing the memes of production’ (Bown and
      Bristow 2019) amounts to a necessary political strategy.
        Mostimportantly,democraticrhetoricalschemasneedtoassumeagenerativefunction
      that extends beyond the logic of existing representations, in what would essentially
      amounttoaneffectiveframingoftheparametersofcontestation.Toputitsimply,reactive
      politicsarenotenough.Democraticforcesneedtoensnarethemselvesinmultimodalacts
      of(digital)culturalproductionvis-a`-visrhetoriconallfronts,beituser-generatedcontent,
      memes, AI-generated content, without of course excluding traditional/conventional

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     17      
                                                             
                                                             
      political repertoires. The task here consists in steering cultural coordinates by contin-
      uously producing and institutionalizing, where possible, ‘total representations’ that are
      fashioned according to democratic values.              
        Atthispoint,Iwouldliketocitearelevantexample,whichdisplaysinthemostdirect
      way the sway and efficacy of political rhetoric. In the run-up to the 2008 election,
      Republican candidateMitt Romney advanced anassault onBarack Obama’shealthcare
      coverage program, which the former derisively labeled ‘Obamacare’. Eighteen days
      before the election, Obama advanced a decisive rhetorical counter-offensive that ef-
      fectively reframed the whole parameters of the discussion. Invoking the presumable
      medical condition of ‘Romnesia’, Obama cited, in the most simplistic and nonchalant
      way,allofRomney’spolicyflip-flops:‘Mr.SeverelyConservativewantsyoutothinkhe
      was severelykiddingabouteverything he said thelast year […]We’vegotta name this
      condition that he’s going through. I think it’s called Romnesia […] I’m not a medical
      doctor,butIdowannagooversomeofthesymptomswithya,becauseIwannamakesure
      nobody else catches it’ (Obama, 2008). He proceeds:    
        Ifyousayyou’reforequalpayforequalwork,butyoukeeprefusingtosaywhetherornot
        you’dsignabillthatprotectsequalpayforequalwork,youmighthaveRomnesia[…]Ifyou
        sayyou’llprotectawoman’srighttochoosebutyoustandupinaprimarydebateandsaidthat
        you’d be delighted to sign a law outlawing that right to choose in all cases, man, you’ve
        definitelygotRomnesia[…]IfyousayearlierintheyearI’mgonnagiveataxcuttothetop
        1percentandtheninadebateyousayIdon’tknowanythingaboutgivingtaxcutstorich
        folks, you need to get a thermometer, take your temperature, ‘cause you probably got
        Romnesia. (Obama,2008)                               
        Extending the rhetorical logic to a series of other examples, Obama reached his
      rhetorical apexby reclaiming theterm ‘Obamacare’inthe mosteffectiveway possible,
      whilecompletelyshatteringRomney’soffensivewithoutmakinganyfactualreferencesto
      hishealthcarecoverageprogram:‘AndifyoucomedownwithacaseofRomnesiaand
      you can’t seem to remember the policies that are still on your website, or the promises
      you’vemadeoverthesixyearsyou’vebeenrunningforpresident,here’sthegoodnews:
      Obamacarecoverspre-existingconditions!’(Obama,2008).Irrespectiveofwhetherone
      is in agreement or not with Obama’s policies, one cannot deny his mastery of political
      rhetoric, which to a considerable extent facilitated his (out of nowhere) rise to power.
        This bring us to a key ethical issue that warrants address. Should democratic forces
      follow the steps of the Far Right by indulging in disinformation, fake news, and deep
      fakes?Myestimationisthatthiswouldamounttoaself-defeatingstrategy.Thechallenge
      consistsinemployingeffectivepoliticalrhetoricwithoutunderminingrequisitestandards
      of ‘truth’ and ‘fact’, even in the way they are conventionally understood. A forward-
      looking democratic offensive should pride itself on its ‘truthiness’, thus differentiating
      itself from the complete arbitrariness of non-democratic political forces. Lies and con-
      spiracies should be exposed through creative processes of subversion, whereby ‘their’
      rhetoric succumbs to the logic of ‘ours’. The general outlook should not consist in a
      fatalismsubjecttothelogicofexistingsociologicalcoordinates(Baudrillard,1994),but,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      18                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      rather, a creative leveraging of the possibilities it provides. This brings me to my next
      point.                                                 
        Should‘rationaldeliberation’,‘analyticrigor’,and‘science’bedoneawaywith?After
      all,mywholearticleiscenteredonthepoliticalutilityofrhetoric,inwhatmightappearas
      anuncriticalextolmentofthepoliticsofrhetoric.Letmebeclearhere,rhetoricisjustone
      politicaltoolamongmany.Thereexistmanyspacesinthe(digital)publicsphere,where
      ‘rational deliberation’ and ‘scientific discourse’ can exercise political effects. A demo-
      craticoffensivecanonlybenefitbyincludinginitsarsenalasmanytoolsaspossible.To
      this end, the function of rhetoric will be crucial in weaving together ‘sloganesque’ and
      ‘rationalist’ modes of contestation, as their frontiers will require common discursive
      referents. This presupposes blurring the distinction between ‘expert’, ‘political’, and
      ‘poetic’ discourse, where the politician becomes the expert, the expert becomes the
      politicianandbothbecomepoets.Thechallengeconsistsinarticulatingnovelhegemonic
      structures through total representations, which would effectively ‘arrest’ the flow of
      informationinthe(digital)publicsphereandmoldittothelogicofdemocracy.Asthese
      thoughts aredraftedonlyadayafterthetragic passingofthegreatMichaelBurawoy,I
      cannot help but renew the call for a ‘public sociology’ (and beyond) that would be
      fashioned according to the challenges and coordinates of our time.
        Thesepotentialitiescanaddamuch-neededimpetustosocialcritique,whichisallthe
      moredisplacedbytherelativistandabsolutistwhimsofpost-truthpolitics.Muchhasbeen
      writtenoverthelasttwodecadesaboutthedemocraticdeficit(Habermas,2003;Norris,
      2011). However, little has been written about its relation to systemic complexity and
      political rhetoric. It is my estimation that the architectural complexity of contemporary
      political institutions occasions a diversity of political demands. These demands, which
      may be associated, divergent, or even contradictory, cannot be referentially exhausted
      either during, or after electoral processes. Nor can there be a coherent institutional re-
      sponsetothesedemandsgiventheirinherentdiversity.Rather,politicalactors‘respond’
      to these demands in the form of affectively charged rhetoric that occasions a sense of
      partial fulfillmentthat isdefacto deferredadinfinitum (see Stavrakakis, 2007:196–98).
      An effective social critique can offer redemptive potentials. By peering into and de-
      constructing political rhetoric, we are enabled in ‘reactivating’ hidden (i.e., subverted)
      politicaldemands.Whatseemslikeablindappealto‘nationalsecurity’mightinfactbe
      masking myriad political demands, including calls for economic equality, a better
      healthcaresystem,arobustwelfarestate,betterschools,etc.Indeconstructingthewhims
      of rhetoric, we are enabled in bringing these demands ‘out of the shadows’ and accord
      them the legitimacy they rightly deserve. The challenge here consists in re-inscribing
      these demands within rhetorical modalities that appeal to democratic imaginaries—a
      processpresupposingtheconstructionofademocraticworldpicturethatcanfacilitateour
      march towards an open democratic horizon.              
      Declaration of conflicting interests                   
      Theauthor(s)declarednopotentialconflictsofinterestwithrespecttotheresearch,authorship,and/
      orpublication of thisarticle.                          
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     19      
                                                             
                                                             
      Funding                                                
      Theauthor(s)receivednofinancialsupportfortheresearch,authorship,and/orpublicationofthis
      article.                                               
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      Michaelangelo Anastasiouhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4932-188X
                                                             
      References                                             
      Ahmed,Sara. 2014.TheCultural Politics ofEmotion. 2nded.EdinburghUniversity Press.
      Althusser,Louis. 1967. “Contradiction andOverdetermination.”New Left Review 41: 15–35.
      Anastasiou,Michaelangelo.2022.NationalismandHegemony:TheConsolidationoftheNationin
         Social andPolitical Life. Routledge.                
      Anastasiou, Michaelangelo. 2024. “Populism and the Mirror of Technology.” In Populism and
         Time: Temporalities of a Disruptive Politics, edited by Andy Knott, 126–47. Edinburgh
         University Press.                                   
      Aristotle.1992.Physics:BooksIandII.TranslatedbyWilliamCharlton.Oxford,England:Oxford
         University Press.                                   
      Aristotle. 1998. Metaphysics. Translated by Hugh Lawson-Tancred. London, England: Penguin
         Books.                                              
      Aristotle. 2000. Nicomachean Ethics. Edited and translated by Roger Crisp, Ethics. Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
      Barthes,Roland.1972.Mythologies.TranslatedbyAnnetteLavers.BooksAbroad.TheNoonday
         Press.                                              
      Barton,ColinC.2019.“CriticalLiteracyinthePost-TruthMediaLandscape.”PolicyFuturesin
         Education17(8): 1024-36.https://doi.org/10.1177/1478210319831569
      Baudrillard,Jean. 1994.Simulacra andSimulation.University of Michigan PPress.
      Berger, Peter, andThomas Luckmann. 1966.The Social Construction of Reality: Treatise in the
         Sociology ofKnowledge.PenguinBooks.                 
      Blumer,Herbert.1969.SymbolicInteractionism:PerspectiveandMethod.UniversityofCalifornia
         Press.                                              
      Bown, Alfie, and Dan Bristow. 2019. Post Memes: Seizing the Memes of Production. Punctum
         Books. https://punctumbooks.com/titles/post-memes-seizing-the-memes-of-production/
      Butler, Judith. 2011. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex”. Routledge. https://
         www.routledge.com/Bodies-That-Matter-On-the-Discursive-Limits-of-Sex/Butler/p/book/
         9780203828274                                       
      Castells, Manuel.2009. CommunicationPower. OxfordUniversity Press.
      Comte, Auguste. 2009. A General View of Positivism. Translated by J. H. Bridges. Cambridge
         University Press. https://www.cambridge.org/9781108000642
      Conrad,Maximilian,GuðmundurHa´lfdanarson,AsiminaMichailidou,CharlotteGalpin,andNiko
         Pyrho¨nen.2023.EuropeintheAgeofPost-TruthPolitics:Populism,Disinformationandthe
         PublicSphere.PalgraveMacmillan.                     
      Critchley,Simon,JacquesDerrida,ErnestoLaclau,andRichardRorty.1996.Deconstructionand
         Pragmatism, editedbyChantal Mouffe. Routledge.      
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      20                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
      Custodi,Jacopo.2021.“NationalismandPopulismontheLeft:TheCaseofPodemos.”Nationsand
         Nationalism 27(3): 705–20.https://doi.org/10.1111/nana.12663
      Dahlgren, Peter (2018) Media, Knowledge and Trust: The Deepening Epistemic Crisis of De-
         mocracy. Javnost - The Public 25(1–2): 20–27. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1080/
         13183222.2018.1418819                               
      Davis,Evan.2017.Post-truth:WhyWeHaveReachedPeakBullshitandwhatWeCanDoaboutit.
         Little, Brown.                                      
      Derrida,Jacques.1993.“Structure,Sign,andPlayintheDiscourseoftheHumanSciences.”InA
         PostmodernReader,editedbyJosephNatoliandLindaHutcheon,Vol.1.StateUniversityof
         NewYork.                                            
      Derrida, Jacques. 2001.WritingandDifference.Routledge. 
      Descartes,Rene.2008.MeditationsonFirstPhilosophy.TranslatedbyMichaelMoriarty.Oxford
         University Press.                                   
      D’Ancona,Matthew.2017.PostTruth:TheNewWaronTruthandHowtoFightBack.EburyPress.
      Elliott,Anthony.2022.“TheComplexSystemsofAI:RecentTrajectoriesofSocialTheory.”InThe
         RoutledgeSocial ScienceHandbookof AI,edited byAnthonyElliott, 3–16. Routledge.
      Finlayson, Alan, Annie Kelly, Rob Topinka, and Ben Little. 2022. “Digital Culture Wars: Un-
         derstandingtheFarRight’sOnlinePowerbase.”Soundings81(81):43–64.https://doi.org/10.
         3898/soun:81.03.2022                                
      Freeden,Michael(2013)ThePoliticalTheoryofPoliticalThinking:TheAnatomyofaPractice.
         Oxford University Press.                            
      Freud,Sigmund.1955.TheInterpretationofDreams:TheCompleteandDefinitiveText.Editedand
         translated byJamesStrachey. BasicBooks.             
      Fuller, Steve. 2016. “Embrace the Inner Fox: Post-Truth as the STS Symmetry Principle Uni-
         versalized.”Social Epistemology Review andReply Collective, December 25, 2016.https://
         social-epistemology.com/2016/12/25/embrace-the-inner-fox-post-truth-as-the-sts-symmetry-
         principle-universalized-steve-fuller/               
      Glynos, Jason, and Yannis Stavrakakis. 2008. “Lacan and Political Subjectivity: Fantasy and
         EnjoymentinPsychoanalysisandPoliticalTheory.”Subjectivity24(1):256–74.https://doi.
         org/10.1057/sub.2008.23                             
      Habermas, Jurgen (2003) Making Sense of the EU: Toward a Cosmopolitan Europe. Journal of
         Democracy 14(4):86–100.Available at: https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2003.0077
      Habermas,Jurgen. 2023.A NewStructural Transformation of thePublic Sphere.Polity Press.
      Hall, Stuart (1997) The Work of Representation. In: Stuart Hall (ed). Representation: Cultural
         RepresentationsandSignifying Practices. Sage,13–74. 
      Hegel,G.W.F.1977.PhenomenologyofSpirit.TranslatedbyA.V.Miller.OxfordUniversityPress.
      Heidegger,Martin.1977.“TheWordofNietzsche:‘GodIsDead’.”InTheQuestionConcerning
         TechnologyandOther Essays,Translated byWilliam Lovitt, 53–112.Garland.
      Heidegger, Martin. 1999. Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning). Translated by Parvis
         EmadandKenneth Maly.Indiana University Press.       
      Hoggan-Kloubert,Tetyana,andChadHoggan.2023.“Post-TruthasanEpistemicCrisis:TheNeed
         forRationality,Autonomy,andPluralism.”AdultEducationQuarterly73(1):3–20.https://
         doi.org/10.1177/07417136221080424                   
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     21      
                                                             
                                                             
      Hong,Sounman,andSunHyoungKim.2016.“PoliticalPolarizationonTwitter:Implicationsfor
         theUseofSocialMediainDigitalGovernments.”GovernmentInformationQuarterly33(4):
         777–82.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2016.04.007    
      Horkheimer,Max,andTheodorW.Adorno(2002)TheConceptofEnlightenment.In:GunzelinS.
         Noerr(ed).DialecticofEnlightenment:PhilosophicalFragments.StanfordUniversityPress,
         1–34.                                               
      Husserl, Edmund. 1980. “First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology.” In Ideas
         PertainingtoaPurePhenomenologyandtoaPhenomenologicalPhilosophy.Translatedby
         F.Kersten, Vol.2.Martinus NijhoffPublishers.        
      Iyengar,Shanto,andDouglasS.Massey.2019.“ScientificCommunicationinaPost-TruthSociety.”
         ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmerica116(16):
         7656–61. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1805868115    
      Jakobson,Roman.2003.“TheMetaphoricandMetonymicPole.”InMetaphorandMetonymyin
         Comparison and Contrast, edited by Rene Dirven and Ralf Porings, 41–47. Mouton de
         Gruyter.                                            
      James,William.1922.Pragmatism:ANameforSomeOldWaysofThinking.Longmans,Greenand
         Co.                                                 
      Kalpokas,Ignas.2019.APoliticalTheoryofPost-Truth.PalgraveMacmillan.https://doi.org/10.
         1007/978-3-319-97713-3                              
      Kant, Immanuel. 1992. “The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the
         Existence of God (1763).” In Theoretical Philosophy 1755-1770, edited and translated by
         DavidWalford andRalf Meerbote, 107–202. CambridgeUniversity Press.
      Kant,Immanuel(1996)AnAnswertotheQuestion:WhatIsEnlightenment?In:MaryJ.Gregor
         (ed).Practical Philosophy. CambridgeUniversity Press, 11–22.
      Kant, Immanuel. 2002. Critique of Practical Reason, Translated by Werner S. Pluhar. Hackett
         Publishing.                                         
      Kant,Immanuel(2007)In:NicholasWalker(ed).CritiqueofJudgement.OxfordUniversityPress.
      Lacan,Jacques(2006)TheInstanceoftheLetterintheUnconsciousorReasonsinceFreud.In:
         BruceFink,HeloiseFink,andRussellCrigg(eds).E´crits.W.W.Norton&Company,412–39.
      Laclau,Ernesto. 2005.On PopulistReason. Verso.         
      LaclauErnesto(2007a)Discourse.In:E.GoodinRobert,PhilipPettit,andPoggeThomas(eds).A
         Companion toContemporary PoliticalPhilosophy.Blackwell, 541–7.
      Laclau,Ernesto. 2007b.Emancipation(S).Verso.           
      Laclau,Ernesto. 2014.TheRhetorical Foundationsof Society.Verso.
      Laclau,Ernesto,andChantalMouffe.1987.“Post-MarxismwithoutApologies.”NewLeftReview
         166: 79–106.                                        
      Laclau,Ernesto,andChantalMouffe.2001.HegemonyandSocialistStrategy:TowardsaRadical
         Democratic Politics.2nded. Verso.                   
      Latour,Bruno(2004)WhyHasCritiqueRunOutofSteam?FromMattersofFacttoMattersof
         Concern.Critical Inquiry 30(2):225–48.              
      Lazer, David M. J., Matthew A. Baum, Yochai Benkler, Adam J. Berinsky, Kelly M. Greenhill,
         FilippoMenczer,MiriamJ.Metzger,BrendanNyhan,GordonPennycook,DavidRothschild,
         MichaelSchudson,StevenA.Sloman,CassR.Sunstein,EmilyA.Thorson,DuncanJ.Watts,
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      22                            Philosophy and Social Criticism 0(0)
                                                             
                                                             
         andJonathanL.Zittrain2018.“TheScienceofFakeNews:AddressingFakeNewsRequiresa
         Multidisciplinary Effort.”Science 359: 1094–6.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aao2998
      Leibniz,G.W.2007.“DiscourseonMetaphysics.”https://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/
         leibniz1686d.pdf                                    
      Locke,John.2003InTwoTreatisesofGovernmentandaLetterConcerningToleration,editedby
         IanShapiro. Yale University Press.                  
      Marx, Karl. 1978a. “Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844.” translated by Martin
         Milligan InTheMarx-Engels Reader,edited byRobertC.Tucker.2nded.W.W.Norton&
         Company.                                            
      Marx,Karl.1978b.“ManifestooftheCommunistParty.”InTheMarx-EngelsReader.2nded.W.W.
         Norton& Company.                                    
      Marx, Karl. 1978c. “The German Ideology: Part I.” translated by S. Ryazanskaya In The Marx-
         EngelsReader,edited byRobertTucker. 2nded. W.W.Norton& Company.
      McCoy,Jennifer,TahminaRahman,andMuratSomer.2018.“PolarizationandtheGlobalCrisisof
         Democracy: Common Patterns, Dynamics, and Pernicious Consequences for Democratic
         Polities.” American Behavioral Scientist 62 (1): 16–42. https://doi.org/10.1177/
         0002764218759576                                    
      McIntyre,Lee.2018. Post-truth.MIT Press.               
      Mead,George.1962.Mind,SelfandSociety:FromtheStandpointofaSocialBehaviorist,editedby
         CharlesMorris. University ofChicago Press.          
      Mouffe, Chantal. 1996. “Deconstruction, Pragmatism and the Politics of Democracy.” In De-
         construction andPragmatism,edited byChantalMouffe.Routledge.
      Mouffe, Chantal.2018. Fora Left Populism.Verso.        
      Norris,Pippa.2011.DemocraticDeficit:CriticalCitizensRevisited.CambridgeUniversityPress.
      Obama,Barack.2008.“ObamacareCoversPre-existingConditions.”YouTubevideo;Uploadedby
         JosephCrews,October 19,2012. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z36bFlSt54k
      Pasquale, Frank. 2015. The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms that Control Money and
         Information. Harvard University Press.              
      Plato.2004.Republic.Translated byC. D.C. Reeve.Hackett Publishing Company.
      Rosa, Hartmut. 2013. Social Acceleration: A New Theory of Modernity. Translated by Jonathan
         Trejo-Mathys. Columbia University Press.            
      Rousseau,Jean-Jacques.1999.DiscourseonPoliticalEconomyandtheSocialContract.Translated
         byChristopher Betts.Oxford University Press.        
      Rouvroy, Antoinette, and Thomas Berns. 2013. “Algorithmic Governmentality and Prospects of
         Emancipation.”Re´seaux 177(1):163–96.               
      Salgado,Susana.2018.“OnlineMediaImpactonPolitics.ViewsonPost-TruthPoliticsandPost-
         Postmodernism.”InternationalJournalofMediaandCulturalPolitics14(3):317–31.https://
         doi.org/10.1386/MACP.14.3.317_1                     
      Saussure,Ferdinandde.1966.CourseinGeneralLinguistics.CharlesBally,AlbertSechehaye,and
         AlbertRiedlinger. Translated byWadeBaskin. McGraw-Hill.
      Schutz,Alfred.1967.ThePhenomenologyoftheSocialWorld.TranslatedbyGeorgeWalshand
         Fredrick Lehnert.Northwestern University Press.     
      Shalin, Dmitri N. 1993. “Modernity, Postmodernism, and Pragmatist Inquiry: An Introduction.”
         SymbolicInteraction 16(4): 303–32.https://doi.org/10.1525/si.1993.16.4.303

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Anastasiou                                     23      
                                                             
                                                             
      Sismondo, Sergio. 2017. “Post-truth?” Social Studies of Science 47 (1): 3–6. https://doi.org/10.
         1177/0306312717692076                               
      Stavrakakis, Yannis (2007) Enjoying the Nation: A Success Story? The Lacanian Left: Psycho-
         analysis,Theory, Politics.EdinburghUniversity Press, 189–210.
      Stavrakakis, Yannis. 2014. “The Return of ‘The People’: Populism and Anti-populism in the
         ShadowoftheEuropeanCrisis.”Constellations21(4):505–17.https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-
         8675.12127                                          
      Stavrakakis,Yannis.2021.“The(Discursive)Limitsof(Left)Populism.”JournalofLanguageand
         Politics 20(1): 162–77.                             
      Stavrakakis, Yannis, and Giorgos Katsambekis. 2014. “Left-Wing Populism in the European
         Periphery:TheCaseofSYRIZA.”JournalofPoliticalIdeologies19(2):119–42.https://doi.
         org/10.1080/13569317.2014.909266                    
      Suiter, Jane. 2016. “Post-Truth Politics.” Political Insight 7 (3): 25–27. https://doi.org/10.1177/
         2041905816680417                                    
      Terren,Ludovic,andRosaBorge.2021.“EchoChambersonSocialMedia:ASystematicReviewof
         the Literature.” Review of Communication Research 9: 100–18. https://doi.org/10.12840/
         ISSN.2255-4165.028                                  
      Thiel,Peter.2025.“TheRealReasonTechIsSwingingtotheRight&ItIsn’tWhatYouThink|
         Peter Thiel.” YouTube video; Uploaded by The Rubin Report. March 3 2025. https://www.
         youtube.com/watch?v=IeiIV5G1vrk                     
      Varoufakis,Yanis.2023. Technofeudalism: What KilledCapitalism.Vintage.
      Venizelos, Giorgos. 2024. “(Anti-)Populism and Post-Truth.” In Post-truth Populism: A New
         Political Paradigm, edited by Saul Newman and Maximilian Conrad, 91-118. Palgrave
         Macmillan.                                          
      Z ˇ izˇek,Slavoj(1993)EnjoyYourNationasYourelf!.TarryingwiththeNegative:Kant,Hegeland
         the Critiqueof Ideology.Duke University Press,200–238.
      Zuboff,Shoshana.2019. TheAgeof Surveillance Capitalism.PublicAffairs.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             