[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2023,Vol.49(9)1061–1078
      The  appropriating  subject:                           
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2022   
      Cultural appreciation,                                 
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      property  and entitlement          sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537211059515
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Jana Cattien                                          
      UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands            
      Richard John Stopford                                 
      DurhamUniversity,Durham,UK                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      Whatiscultural‘appropriation’?Whatiscultural‘appreciation’?Whateverthecomplex
      answer to this question, cultural appropriation is commonly defined as ‘the taking of
      somethingproducedbymembersofoneculturebymembersofanother’(Young2005:
      136), whilst appreciation is typically understood as mere ‘exploration’: ‘Appreciation
      explores whatever is there’. (Gracyk 2007: 112). These provisional definitions suggest
      thatthereisanin-principledistinctionbetweenthetwoconceptsthatpresupposesthe
      following:whatisappreciatedisalreadyavailable;whatisappropriatedwas,priortoits
      being taken, not already there or available. Moreover, perhaps appreciation, when
      contrasted to appropriation, is unproblematic precisely due to this basic difference.
      Inthis paper,wearguethatthe exclusive disjunction– appropriation or appreciation –
      rests on a false distinction between the two. We also show that this distinction pre-
      supposesafalsenormativeprinciplethattotheextentthatxisappreciationratherthan
      appropriation, then x is not – relevant to this issue – a wrong. Against these presup-
      positions, we defend the view that appropriation isalready built into appreciation.This
      does not mean that we cannot ask questions of appreciation, but that questions of
      appreciation do not preclude the problematics of appropriation.
      Keywords                                               
      cultural appropriation, aesthetic appreciation, literature, art, colonialism, race
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      JanaCattien,UniversityofAmsterdamFacultyofHumanities,OudeTurfmarkt145,Amsterdam1012VT,
      Netherlands.                                           
      Email:j.d.cattien@uva.nl                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1062                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      Thequestionof‘appropriationorappreciation?’isclearlyvexed.Toanextent,thisdifficulty
      arisesduetotheheterogeneityofcandidatecases.InthecaseofLedZeppelin,istheirmusican
      appropriationoftheblues,oranappreciationofit?IsBillEvans’incorporationofEuropeanart
      musicsensibilitiesintohisjazzanindexoftheappropriatinginfluenceofEuropeancultureon
      African-American music, or a reverence for it? Is having dreadlocks, listening to dub, and
      affectingpatoiswhilstbeingwhitetoappreciateRastafariculture,ortoappropriateit?Arethe
      Polynesian techniques involved in tatau available for use in European and Americantattoo
      parlours?IsAlanWatts’proselytisingofBuddhistteachingreverentialandauthenticinsome
      relevantsense,orjustanothercaseofappropriation?Thelistcouldgoon.Itappearsthatthe
      questionof‘appropriationorappreciation?’mustbemethodologicallysensitivetocomplex
      differencesbetweencandidatecases,whilststillaskingsomekindofcoherentquestionofallof
      them.Indeed,thetheoreticalchallengesappeardiverse:theapparentplagiarisingofmusical
      motifsandmaterial;theencroachmentofadominant,oldertraditiononan-‘other’;donning
      theaccoutrementsandsymbolsofan-‘otherculture’;usingandprofitingfromtheexpressive
      techniques developed by ‘other’ cultures; enjoying how ‘other’ art traditions signify in the
      contextofone’sown;beinga‘mouthpiece’for‘an-other’culture.Allofthesequestionsof
      appropriation sit alongside straightforward colonial theft.
        Thatsaid,perhapsonethinksthiscomplexityismerelysuperficial.Afterall,ineachof
      theabovecasesonemightsaythatthedifferenceiseasy:thesearecasesofappropriation.
      If one uses or takes ‘other’ cultural material, this is to ‘appropriate’ it. If, on the other
      hand, one does not use it but merely acts as an audience, as it were, then this is ap-
      preciation.So,ifawhiteEuropeanstartsadubband,they‘appropriate’dubculture.If,on
      the other hand they merely listen to King Tubby, they ‘appreciate’ dub culture. Indeed,
      cultural appropriation is commonly defined as ‘the taking of something produced by
      members ofoneculturebymembersofanother’(Young2005,136; Italicsadded);‘the
      taking–fromaculturethatisnotone’sown–ofintellectualproperty,culturalexpressions
      orartifacts,historyandwaysofknowledge’(ZiffandRao1997,1;Italicsadded).Yetas
      seeminglystraightforwardastheseanalyticapproachesto‘appropriation’appear,asZiff
      and Rao note, what ‘use’ and ‘taking’ consists in, is by no means obvious (ibid. 1–2).
        Let us grant that ‘appropriation’ may be considered complex in the details, but is
      essentiallystraightforward:itisanactof‘taking’.Whatabout‘appreciation’?Despitethe
      commonness of the question, ‘appreciation’ is rarely analysed in the context of ‘ap-
      propriation’.Extendeddiscussionhastendedtotakeplacewithintheambitofaesthetics
      moregenerally.Forexample,Gracykanalyses‘appreciation’asakindofregisteringofan
      object’s artistic properties without necessarily evaluating them: ‘Appreciation explores
      whateveristhere’.(2007,112).1Thisideaisimmediatelyapplicableinthecontextofthe
      appropriationdebate,andmayhelpusmakesenseoftheprimafaciedistinctionbetween
      the two concepts. When anyone appreciates King Tubby, they merely explore the
      manifest aesthetic properties of the music; they do not thereby take anything.
        Aswithappropriation,however,nothingissosimple.Thenotionof‘appreciation’isalso
      contested.ForIseminger,‘appreciation’means‘valuingforitsownsaketheexperiencingof
      thatstateofaffairs’.(2005,99;Italicsadded);forLevinson,intrinsicappreciationinvolves
      a‘finding-value’(2016,37;Italicsadded);Buddwritesthat‘appreciationofaworkisnota
      matterofknowingwhatitsaestheticpropertiesare,butofperceivingthemasrealisedinthe

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1063     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      work’ (2008, 58; Italics added); Davies suggests that ‘the pleasure that may come from
      appreciating a musical work for itself can be characterised only through a description of
      features apprehended and appreciated in the musical work, where that description ac-
      knowledgesthemusicalworkasanindividual’(1987,316;Italicsadded).Yetwhateverthe
      disagreements between aestheticians, they all seem to agree that appreciation involves
      something that is, as Gracyk puts it, already there. This commitment is italicised in its
      variousformsinalltheabovequotations.Ineachoftheseglosses,whatis‘appreciated’is
      alreadymanifestapartfromthesubject.Moreovernothingaboutanyoftheseanalysesof
      appreciation depends on taking or using the object of appreciation.
        So, whatever the complexities of ‘appropriation’ and ‘appreciation’ individually, there
      appears to be an essential distinction between them: appropriation necessarily involves
      taking;appreciationdoesnot.Onthatbasisalone,onemaythinkthatnomatterhowcomplex
      theanalysesofparticularcasesof‘appropriation’,thereisagroundingtheoreticaldistinction
      between‘appropriation’and‘appreciation’.Moretothepoint,wecanreadoffthisdistinction
      that just appreciating is not a de facto wrong. After all, there is nothing wrong with just
      recognisingandenjoyingsomething’saestheticproperties.Ofcourse,onemayhavetaken
      something in order to appreciate it; but then that person, culture, or nation is not merely
      ‘appreciating’,theyarealso‘appropriating’.Thepointhereisobvious:justappreciatingis
      blamelesspreciselybecauseitisnotappropriating.2Theintelligibilityoftheappropriation
      versus appreciation debate has rested, even if only implicitly, on this distinction.
        Inthispaper,werejectthisdistinction–atleastinthecontextofculturalappropriationand
      culturalappreciation–andmuchofthedebatethathascometodependonit.Wedefendthe
      viewthat‘culturalappropriation’isalreadybuiltinto‘culturalappreciation’.Thatdoesnotmean
      that we cannot ask questions concerning ‘appreciation’, or questions concerning ‘appropria-
      tion’.However,ifonethinksthatthesequestionsarefundamentallyseparableinthecontextof
      culture,wearguethatthisisaprofoundmistake.‘Appreciation’and‘appropriation’mustbe
      consideredaccordingtosocio-culturalandhistoricalparticularities.Moretothepoint,ascanbe
      seen in each opening example, particularities reveal and revolve around power imbalances.3
      A more appropriate formulation of our position is that the ‘appreciation’ of the hegemonic
      subjecttakesthesubalternobjectasanobjectforitselfandisthereforeappropriative.4Inorder
      tomakegoodonthisclaim,weprovideacriticalontologyofhegemonic,culturalappreciation.
      Against the idea that cultural appreciation fundamentally involves what isalready there, we
      arguethatwhatis‘culturallyappreciated’ismanifestedinadvancebytheappreciatingsubject.
      This ‘manifestation in advance’ is already an act of cultural appropriation.
        Ineachoftheopeningexamples,wethinkthatthereisalreadyaproblemintheset-up
      of the question: does x ‘appropriate or appreciate’ y? In each case, whatever the heg-
      emonicsubject,x,istakentobe,itistakentoberelevantlydistinctfromtheytowhichitis
      relatedeitherbyappropriationorappreciation.Moretothepoint,theobjectisconsidered
      onticallydistinctfromthesubject.Thisisabadmodelontwocounts.Firstly,ashasbeen
      amply demonstrated by postcolonial theorists from Said (1987) through Spivak (1988),
      representationof‘the(oriental)other’,orthesubaltern,inhegemonicdiscourse–suchas
      in philosophical questions about appropriation and appreciation – has always been the
      workofhegemonyandhegemonicsubjects.Thereisnogiven objectofthe‘other’that
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1064                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      exists outside of hegemonic discourse which can then be brought into philosophical
      analysis; the ‘object’ is already a function of that discourse.
        Buildingontheworkofthesetheorists,wewanttoexploretherelationshipbetween
      subjects and objects of appreciation on formal, aesthetic grounds. Our argument is that
      formal structures of Western aesthetic experience, especially space, time and
      objecthood–formalfeaturesthatunderwritethepossibilityofan‘alreadythere’object–
      are already appropriative. In this, we draw on critical theories of property and dispos-
      session,aswellascriticalraceandpostcolonialaesthetics.Weareparticularlyinspiredby
      Al-Saji’s(2019)recentarticle,inwhichshedevelopsaFanonianphenomenology(1967)
      ofexperiencingcolonialartworks asaracialisedsubject.Herpointisthattheracialised
      viewerexperiencesWesternartworksthroughadistinctivetemporalityof‘lateness’:the
      sensethatoneisalwaysalreadytoolatetointerveneinthemeaningfulnessofracialised
      representations(2019,477).Arepresentationofoneself(asracialisedother)isalwayson
      thehorizon,onitsway,andthemeaningofthatrepresentationwhenitarrivesisalready
      exhausted.Assuch,notonlyisinterventioninthemeaningfulnessoftherepresentation
      notpossible;theexhaustionofmeaningitselfisexperiencedas‘sticky’or‘gluey’.Itisthe
      feeling of being caught up in the morass of congealed racialisation which situates,
      constitutesandfixesitsracialisedsubjects,readytomakethemfeelpowerlessinadvance.
        However, whilst Al-Saji focuses on the representation and meaningfulness of Ori-
      entalist imagery and its temporal effects, we want to reflect on the formal aesthetic
      structures of hegemonic cultural appreciation. That is, on the features of representation
      thatcodifyandconstitutetheontologiesofcolonising/colonisedsubjects/objectsasthey
      are configured in the formal structures of aesthetic representation. We will develop our
      viewthroughacriticalanalysisofrecentdebatesonliteratureandculturalappropriation,
      as well as through an in-depth study of Gauguin’s Bathers In Tahiti (1897). We have
      chosentheseexamplesnottoproveageneralprinciple,butinordertoreflectonthemyriad
      waysthatculturalappreciationisentangledwithhegemonicappropriation:howappropriation
      iscodifiedwithin‘appreciative’representationalcontent;howformal,spatio-temporalfeatures
      ofappreciationareconstitutivelyappropriating;andhowthestructuralrelationshipbetween
      the ‘appreciating’ hegemonic subject and the subaltern object is appropriative.
      Art and/as entitlement                                 
      In 2016, prize-winning author Lionel Shriver declared that the twin fads of ‘political
      correctness’and‘culturalappropriation’mightmeantheendoffictionasweknowit.Her
      keynote speech at the Brisbane Writers Festival, entitled ‘Fiction and Identity Politics’,
      revolvedaroundthecentralclaimthatwriting(good)fictionrequiresthepermissibilityof
      cultural appropriation: ‘Because the ultimate endpoint of keeping out [sic] mitts off ex-
      periencethatdoesn’tbelongtousisthatthereisnofiction’(Shriver,2016,n.p.).Inother
      words,fictionwritersmustbeallowed,atleastinprinciple,toconstructfictionalcharacters
      withlifeworldsthathaveno,orverylittleoverlap,withthewriter’sown.Afterall,Shriver
      said, fiction writing is a ‘disrespectful vocation by its nature – prying, voyeuristic, klep-
      tomaniacal,andpresumptuous.Andthatisfictionwritingatitsbest’(n.p.,ItalicsAdded).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1065     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        Freelyobfuscatingthedifferencebetweenfictionalandnon-fictionalrealms,Shriver’s
      rhetoricissomethingliketheliteraryequivalentoffamiliarclaimsthattheriseof‘political
      correctness’threatenstoputanendtocovetedliberalideasof‘freedomofspeech’.She
      has joined the ranks of English comedian John Cleese, who has likewise predicted the
      declineofartandcreativityatlarge,if‘politicalcorrectness’weretobeletlooseonartists
      like himself (Schulman 2020). The heightened levels of awareness around issues of
      ‘culturalappropriation’,aswediscusstheminthisarticle,pose,intheirview,asignificant
      threattothefreeplayofthecreativeandliteraryimagination.OnShriver’sformulation,
      this is because imagining fictional people and events, as the fiction writer must do, is
      necessarilyanactofappropriation,oftakingownershipoverthosefictionalpeopleand
      events.Ofcourse,thefictionwriterexploitshercharacters:‘Howcould[she]not?They
      are [her] characters, to be manipulated at [her] whim, to fulfil whatever purpose [she]
      cares to put them too’ (2016, n.p.).                   
        Atfirstglance,Shriver’sspeechseemstocoincidewiththeargumentthatweadvance
      inthispaper:likeus,sheseemstobesuggestingthatliteraryappreciationandimagination
      necessarily involve a prior structure of (cultural) appropriation. However, Shriver’s
      versionoftheclaimthatculturalappreciationisalwaysalreadyappropriationdeniesthe
      political significance of cultural appropriation altogether. She wants to recast all her
      culturalentitlementsasaliterary/artisticentitlementthatemergesfromthesimple–and
      thus politically innocent – fact of her being a writer of fiction, rather than being, as we
      argue,anentitlementthatisconstitutiveofthehegemonic(whiteEuropean)subject,with
      all the histories of colonial violence, exploitation and dispossession that this entails.
        Inwhatfollows,weexamineinmoredetailwhatitmeansforthehegemonicsubjectto
      insist on its entitlement to cultural appropriation. We show that this entitlement already
      constitutesthegrounduponwhichanysubsequentenquiryintowhetherornotsomethingis
      ‘appreciation’ or ‘appropriation’ takes place – the hegemonic subject is, in short, an ap-
      propriatingsubject.AsShriver’sspeechillustrates,itsentitlementtotheworldisconceived
      asanabstractentitlement:abstractinthesensethat‘other’culturesmustbeavailabletothe
      hegemonic subject even if no actual cultural appropriation takes place. Crucially, the
      normativeforceofthis‘must’isnotexternal,butalreadygroundedinthestructureofthe
      hegemonic subject. Thus, rather than debating the rights and wrongs of cultural
      appropriation–whethera‘benign’gestureofculturalappreciationmight,infact,turnoutto
      be a more pernicious act of cultural appropriation (see e.g. Coleman 2004, Heyd 2003,
      Young2005)–weareprincipallyconcernedwiththepoliticsofculturalappropriationin
      thisabstractsense:notasaparticularandempiricallyobservablerelationshiptoacultural
      objectthatcanbedeemedeitherrightorwrong,butastheabstract‘right’toenterintosucha
      relationshipatthediscretionofthehegemonicsubject.Whatisatstakeinourargumentis
      thus not whether and how cultural appropriation is wrong, ethically speaking (see e.g.
      Youngand Brunk 2009),but how culturalappropriation constructsmarginalised cultures
      andidentitiesasalwaysalreadyavailableforappropriationbythehegemonicsubject,even
      as actual ownership or possession of these cultures and identities might never occur.5
        Making this argument requires a shift in how we standardly conceptualise the rela-
      tionship between cultural appropriation and ‘property’. As discussed above, Young
      definescultural appropriation as‘thetakingofsomethingproducedbymembersofone

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1066                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      culture by members of another’ (2005, 136). Examining this definition through a ma-
      terialist lens, the wrong of cultural appropriation emerges as a function of the material
      inequalitiesonwhichitrestsandwhichitinturnreproduces:thepersonwhois‘taking’is
      different from theperson who is ‘producing’the object orgood in question. Just as the
      workerisalienatedfromthefruitsoftheirlabourandthereforeexploitedbythecapitalist,
      thecommunitythatisatthereceivingendofculturalappropriationisalienatedfromtheir
      own cultural productions and hence exploited by the appropriators.6 Their rightful
      ownership over what has been produced is violated through the wrongful taking of the
      good or goods in question. This is appropriation in the sense of ‘dispossession’: the
      wrongful taking of property.7                          
        However, Young’s definition of appropriation misses out key aspects of what is
      politically significant about structures of dispossession in the first place. What remains
      hidden from Young’s definition is that the ‘taking of’ someone else’s property might
      actually entail the prior rendering of something as property that was not considered as
      property before: what Nichols calls dispossession as ‘property-generating theft’ (2018,
      22).DrawingonNichols’insight,wecanexpandYoung’soriginaldefinitioninsignificant
      ways:culturalappropriation,aswewanttounderstandit,consistsnotmerelyinthetaking
      ofsomething,butintherenderingofsomethingasanobjectthatcan–inprinciple,evenif
      never in actuality – be taken by the hegemonic subject. Thus, rather than merely ex-
      pressing the view that individual acts of cultural appropriation are permissible, the
      hegemonicsubject’sinsistenceontheir‘right’toculturalappropriationisinfactalarger
      claim about the kind of subject position that they want to inhabit in the world: a
      ‘possessive, proprietary orientation’ (Myers 2019, 7) in which other cultures might be
      viewed through the lens of property, regardless of whether or not they actually become
      objects of cultural appropriation as defined by Young. 
        Thisnotionofappropriationasanabstractorientation,ratherthanasadiscreteactthatis
      amenable to questions of individual ethical responsibility, is helpfully captured in von
      Redecker’snotionof‘phantompossession’.‘Phantompossession’,asshedefinesit,shifts
      the focus in the debate around appropriation and dispossession from an exclusively ma-
      terialistdomain,toalsoconsiderthosesymbolicbenefitsthataccruetodominantsubjects
      notjustinvirtueoftheirwrongfultakingofotherpeople’slandandlivelihoods,butfrom
      beingabletorelatetoobjectsandpeopleintheworldthroughthelensofpropertyinthefirst
      place:‘[The]retractionofdominionintoitssubjects,thepotentialtopartakeindominion,is
      whatIcallphantompossession.Thetermallowsustolinkthesubjectivesideofembodied
      entitlement to dominion to the objective side of propertization’ (2020, 49).8
        We can illustrate von Redecker’s point about the ‘retraction of dominion into its
      subjects’bywayofShriver’sspeech.Beingfacedwithsubstantialcriticismforhercrude
      depictions of racialized characters in her books, Shriver’s defence strategy is, crucially,
      nottodefendtheparticularcreativechoicesshehasmadeinimaginingthesecharacters
      (Shriver2016).Instead,herstrategyofjustificationoperatesatthelevelofabstractclaims
      aboutthenatureoffictionwritingitself.Byclaimingthatthefictionwritermustbeableto
      appropriate identities that are not her own, Shriver frames the ability to appropriate
      marginalisedidentitiesasaconstitutivefeatureofthefictionwriter,whoistherebyendowed
      with what von Redecker calls a ‘dispositio[n] to appropriate’ (2020, 49). Cultural

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1067     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      appropriationis‘retracted’intothedominantsubjecttotheextentthatthisappropriationcan
      be upheld in symbolic terms: as a subjective entitlement to marginalised identities that
      may – or crucially, may not – overlap with objective conditions of ownership.
        Indeed,itisquitetellingthatShriverhaschosentodealwithcriticismsofherliterary
      choicesinthisway.Consider,forexample,howshedescribestheblackwomancharacter
      in her novel The Mandibles:                            
        InTheMandibles,Ihaveonesecondarycharacter,Luella,who’sblack.She’smarriedtoa
        morecentralcharacter,Douglas,theMandiblefamily’s97-year-oldpatriarch…intheendthe
        joke is on Douglas, because Luella suffers from early onset dementia, while his ex-wife,
        staunchly of sound mind, ends up running a charity for dementia research. As the novel
        reachesitsclimaxandthefamilyisreducedtothestreet,they’reobligedtoputtheaddled,
        disoriented Luella onaleash, tokeepher fromwandering off.(Shriver2016,n.p.)
        Shriver’s characterisation of Luella is an apt example of the ‘possessive, proprietary
      orientation’ (Myers 2019, 7) that, for Du Bois (2007), characterises white people’s at-
      titudestowardspeopleofcolour.Myerselaboratesthispointbydrawingourattentionto
      the passages in Du Bois’ The Souls of White Folk where he renders ‘whiteness as the
      ownershipoftheearth,foreverandever’(2007,15).9AsMyersputsit,‘[t]hisdeclaration
      captures Du Bois’ distinctive analysis of whiteness as a possessive stance, a mode of
      relationalitythatregardstheworld–andcrucially,itsnon-whiteinhabitantsandtheplaces
      they live – as property, or potentially so’ (2019, 9).10 We want to draw attention to the
      ‘potentiallyso’inMyers’formulation,becauseitunderlinesthepointthat‘whitenessas
      phantom possession does not require actual, personal ownership of Black people’ (von
      Redecker 2020, 51). The ‘afterlife of slavery’, in Hartmann’s formulation, creates the
      conditionsinwhichblackpeople‘remai[n]burdenedwiththemarkoftheobjectstatus’
      (1997, 119) long after formal abolition, thus labelling them as ‘potential’ property.
        AccordingtovonRedecker,‘phantompossession’allowsdominantsubjectstodefend
      theirentitlements toandovermarginalised subjectsinawaythatisabstractedfromthe
      ‘lived relation’ with these subjects (2020, 49). Crucially, the pressure on the white
      European subject to abstract from its lived relations with marginalised people becomes
      more acute the more marginalised people successfully advocate for their own emanci-
      pation.AsvonRedeckerputsit:‘[p]hantompossessionintensifiesinthefaceofresistance
      and emancipation. Phantom possession in whiteness and masculinity is the excess ac-
      cumulation of entitlement brought up against the horizon of the possible freedom of
      oppressed others’ (2020, 35). In the case of cultural appropriation, this horizon is the
      increasingly visible resistance of marginalised communities to cultural appropriation; a
      horizon of resistance that critics aim to mock and neutralise by labelling it as ‘political
      correctness’ (see Cattien, 2023). Building on von Redecker’s point about the abstract
      entitlementsthatconstitutethehegemonicsubject,thefollowingsectionexploreshowthe
      appropriating disposition of the hegemonic subject is codified in formal structures of
      aestheticappreciationastheyarerepresentedbothbyandwithinartworks.How,inother
      words,dohegemonicsubjectsrepresenttothemselvesaworldthatis,inprinciple,ifnot
      materially, always already available for taking?       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1068                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      Gauguin’s moment                                       
      In the remainder of this paper, we argue that the ‘appreciating’ hegemonic subject is a
      subject which cannot help but appropriate. Specifically, we show that this ‘appreciating’
      subjectisconstitutedbyanappropriatinggazefoundwithinGauguin’sBather’sinTahiti.
      Furthermore,thisgazeformallyreplicatestheappropriating‘appreciation’ofGauguinand
      thevieweralike.Throughacriticalanalysisofthispaintingwecanexcavateamodelofhow
      hegemonicsubjectsconfiguretheworldasalwaysalreadyavailableasobjects-for-property,
      therebyshowingthattheiraestheticappreciationispredicatedonthisabstract,constituting
      structure of appropriation. The aim here is not point a finger at Gauguin, but to use his
      paintingtofurtherexemplifythedepthtowhichaestheticappreciationiscompromisedby
      thestructuralrelationshipsbetweenhegemonicsubjectsand(their)objectsofattention,even
      incaseswhereculturalappropriationas‘taking’intheYoungiansensemightneveroccur.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      TheproblematicsofGauguin’sTahitipaintings–productsofhistravelsinthemultiply-
      colonised Tahiti – have been well explored in the context of racism, sexism and co-
      lonialism.11 The aim here is not to revisit those points exactly. There is the ‘appro-
      priation or appreciation’ question over Gauguin’s use/incorporation of African and
      Japaneseaestheticsandtechniquesintheflattened,graphicrenderingofperspectiveand
      colour.12Totheextentthatthisquestioncausesustoreflectuponaspecificinstanceof
      colonialism, this is no bad question. But then such critical inquiry is perhaps best
      conductedwithoutthedistractionofhandwringingaboutwhethersomeparticularcase
      is ‘appropriation’ or ‘appreciation’.                  
        We believe there is a much more acute analysis to be had which reveals the ‘ap-
      preciating’ colonial gaze, and a kind of appropriating subjectivity that underwrites this
      gaze.Ontheonehand,wefindacolonisinggazethatisoperativewithinthepainting:itis
      the gaze of the implied – yet unmarked/unrepresented – subject who views the bathers
      fromwithinthescene.Ontheotherhand,thegazeofthisimpliedsubjectisacodification
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1069     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      ofGauguin’sowngaze,andthegazeoftheWesternaudienceviewingthepainting.Thisis
      an‘appreciating’gazeconfiguredaccordingtothesubjectivitysketchedintheprevious
      section: a subject characterised by its ‘disposition to appropriate’ (von Redecker 2020,
      49). So, by revealing the appreciation within the painting, we reveal the structures of
      appreciation of the painting and its subject matter; from that we decode what kinds of
      subjectsappreciateinthoseways.Wecanmobiliseappreciationinthefamiliarmodality
      ofobjectification,ofwhichtherearetworelatedforms.Oneisamodeofthemalegaze,
      mediatedbyOrientalistexoticism.13Thewomenareframed,‘natural’‘beauties’available
      to the spectator for fetishised contemplation. We want to put this somewhat familiar
      modality to the side.14 There is another much less obvious aspect of objectification:
      appropriative appreciation codified in structures of gazing that configure the formal
      relationship between the viewing/painting subject and its ‘objects’.
        Thetemporalityofthescenesuggestsaraw,lived,in-the-momentspontaneity.Whilst
      verymuchposed,thepositionsofthewomen’sbodies,theirturningheads,suggestthat
      theywereinthemiddleofbathingwhenthepainter‘turnedup’asitwere.Distracted,they
      turnfromwhattheyaredoingtofacehim.Thisisalreadyatouchinsincere:thewomenare
      clearly posed for sexual innuendo; the painterly intention is that the eroticism of the
      momentisaccidental.Nevertheless,wearesupposedtofeelasthoughthisisamomentin
      time unfolding. The spontaneity is emphasised by the wash of movement coming up
      throughthereflectionofthebushesinthewaterintheleftcorner,andthenintothebushes
      themselves.Thissurgeofmovementsweepsbackbehindthetrees,framingthewomanon
      the left, and flows out through the arms of the woman on the right. Movement is again
      emphasisedbytheredsbehindthebushes,whichalsofollowthedirectionofthissweep,
      andpetersoutinthegentleswirlofthetreesinthedistance,inthefarright.Theframingof
      thesceneasposedisfurtherdisruptedbythetreeintheforeground.Itsdualroleistogive
      theimpressionthatthisscenehasbeenstumbledupon–thepainterdidnothavethetime
      tofindabettervantagepoint,andcapturedthescenejustasitwaswiththetreealreadyin
      theway.Again,thissuggestionisinsincereasthetreeinfactactsasaproptoexcitethe
      gaze.Itinvitestheviewertotheirowndesire,towanttopeeraroundthetreetoseethe
      nakedwomanbehind.Thetreealsogivestheviewerasenseofprotectionfromthegazeof
      the women: whilst they are in a clearing, we are amongst the trees. Finally, the post-
      impressionist, proto-fauvist, daubs of colour are deployed to capture the sense of the
      moment over a mimetic representation of it.            
        In the painting, there are a complex, interrelated set of spatio-temporalities which
      structuretherepresentation,andwhichinturnhelpusdecodetherelativeconfigurations
      of subjects and objects. We then explore the ways that these spatio-temporalities are
      functions of a subject disposed to appropriation. By critically exposing these spatio-
      temporalities,werevealcrucialconfigurationsinhegemonicsubjectivity–configurations
      whichresultinappropriativemodelsofaestheticappreciation.Whatthenarethesespatio-
      temporalities?Thereisthespatio-temporalstructureofthemomentwithinthepainting;
      the political contradictions between this spatio-temporality and the material conditions
      underwhichthepaintingisproduced;andfinally,howtheseproblematicsareanticipated
      by subject-object relations under the universal scope of colonial space and time.
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1070                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
        Thepaintingitselfisofamomentthathaslongsincepassed–ifindeedtherewasany
      suchmoment.Asdiscussed,theform,contentandtechniquesofthepaintingsuggestthat
      themomentcapturedinthepaintingiscapturedjustasthepainterarrivesuponthescene.
      The effect of the painter happening upon the scene treats its contents as something
      discovered and discoverable. The notion of discovery, and the spatio-temporality of
      discovery, is crucial to the effect of the painting: excitement at discovery. One way of
      situatingthetemporalityofthismomentanditseffectsisintheideathatallalong,before
      Gauguin’sappearance,therearetwowomenbathing,somewhereinapooloflushforest.
      Forhowlongwedonotknow.Priortothemomentofthepainting,therewasnothingyet
      forustosee.Allwehaveisthepromiseofseeingsomethingexciting,apromisewhichwe
      are entitled to retroactively by way of the discovery depicted in the painting. In other
      words,insofaraswemadethisdiscovery,ofthesetwowomenbathingjustnow,weare
      entitled to believe that there are other discoveries to be had. Hence this moment is in-
      dicative,reachingbackintothepastandforwardintothefutureasanever-presentpromise
      of discovery.15                                        
        Yet, this moment is a lie; it is contradictory. The moment of Gauguin’s appearance
      spatio-temporallyframesthemomentofthepainting,almostasifjusthisgazeisenough
      to instantaneously bring into being the entire scene, painting and all. The actual tem-
      poralityrequiredtorenderthemoment–thetimespentwhenGauguinsetouttomakehis
      discovery, and then sat down to paint the bathers – is erased by the temporality of the
      painting.Thisisnotamereaccidentofthetimetakentomakeart;theerasureiscrucialto
      the painting. What Gauguin wants to capture is ‘the find’, not the spatio-temporal
      conditions required to make possible the appearance of the find. Indeed, these must
      beerasedpreciselyinordertomaintaintheintegrityoftheeffectofthefinding:thatreal
      discoveryof‘somethingwonderful’ispossiblewithoutanylabour.Thatitisalreadythere
      waitingforus,andallwehavetodoisfindit,andthattherewardofthatfindisinstant.But
      thisisamaterialfalsehood:allofthis,thepainting,thecontents,thebathers,theaesthetic
      effects, are Gauguin’s work, and work takes time.16    
        Sofar,wehaveconsideredthewaysGauguingeneratesthemomentofdiscoveryand
      its effects. We could consider these ways as ‘technologies’.17 From the technologies
      involvedin‘travel’thatbroughtGauguintoTahiti,tothetechnologies/techniquesofpost-
      impressionismwhichcanbemobilisedtorendertimeandspaceinparticularways.18The
      aesthetic effects of the latter evaporate the spatio-temporality of the former, generating
      theconditionsofaseeminglyunmediatedaestheticpleasure,apleasureuntaintedbythe
      extra-aesthetic tethers of business and labour. Crucially, this singular moment, this
      finding,canthenberelived,overandover,byits(Western)audience–anaudiencewho
      are relieved by the semblance of spontaneity from having to engage with the material
      conditions of colonisation and conquest required for such a moment. This point is not
      new.19Instead,weareofferingacritical,hermeneuticapproachtothepaintingwhereby
      appreciation-as-appropriation is codified into the formal aesthetics of the painting. This
      codificationisitselfanindexofthewaythatobjectsarerenderedrelativetothepainter/
      viewingsubjects.Inturn,thisindicates adeeper dimensionto‘technology’:thesubject
      itself as a technology for producing objects.          
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1071     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        This last idea sits at the heart of our argument. The distinctive materiality of
      the bathers’ bodies is ambiguous relative to the materiality of their environment. The
      consistencyofcolourandtexturebetweenthebathersandtheenvironmentissuchthatthe
      women are represented as materially part of the ‘natural’ environment; they are dis-
      tinguishablenotinmaterialtermsbutundertheconditionsofsalienceunder‘our’gaze.
      Ontheonehand,wearetoldthatthewomenarebathing.Yet,theirmaterialambiguitycan
      justaseasilymakeitappearthattheyareliterallyemergingoutofthelandscape,asmuch
      as they are bathing. It is as if Gauguin’s moment conjures them out of nature and into
      distinct,objectivebeing.Thesemioticeffectofthisrepresentationalambiguityisthatthe
      women maintain the trace of their indistinctness from the spatio-temporal plenum of
      ‘natural’ materiality. ‘Gauguin’s moment’ hovers between the women’s being part of
      ’nature’still–thatis,notyetanobject(forus)–whilstalsocapturingtheirdetermination
      asobject,whichhappensinstantaneouslyatthemomentofbeingfound.Hence,perhaps
      what is most exciting about the painting is that it captures the sense for the painter and
      vieweralikeofbringingthesetwowomenintothebeingofobjecthood,asdistinguishable
      from their environment.                                
        Whendiscussingthenotionof‘thefind’abovewesuggestedthatthewomenrepresent
      apromiseofsomethingalreadyreadytobefoundintheforest.Thisideaisnowfinessed
      further:itisnotthatthewomenwerealreadythere;wearenotmerelyappreciatingobjects
      and their aesthetic properties as we find them. Rather, the world is a potentiality that is
      functionallyrealisedbytheappreciatingpowersofthehegemonicsubject.Appreciation
      maygenerallyrequire,asGracyksays,somethingtobealreadythere.However,cultural
      appreciation actively conjures the form and being of its aesthetic material; hence, the
      object’s‘alreadybeing’apartfrom,andpriorto,thesubjectturnsouttobeanillusionof
      thehegemonicsubject’sownmaking.WhatGauguincapturesinthismomentisthesame
      kindofproperty-generating subjectivitythatemergedfromShriver’sspeech oncultural
      appropriation: a universal subject that engages with the world through the lens of
      property/entitlement and, in so doing, brings it into the kind of material existence that
      mattersforitself.RepresentedinGauguin’spainting,asitisrenderedforbothhimselfand
      hisWesternaudience,isasensethatwhatitisliketo‘see’asahegemonicsubjectisto
      bring the non-Western world into being.                
        ThepointabouttheuniversalisinginstinctsofEnlightenmentculturehasbeenamply
      exploredinpostcolonialscholarship.Whatissotellinginthiscaseisnotmerelythatthe
      womenareappropriatedforthepurposesofGauguin’sownprojects,orfor‘our’viewing
      pleasure,oreventhatthepaintingrepresentstheuniversalisingcreepofWesternculture;it
      is that hegemonic entitlements to universal representation are codified in the aesthetic
      structuresoftherepresentationitself.WhatGauguincapturesinthismomentisakindof
      subjectivityindexedtoaformofrepresentationandappearancewhichisitselfuniversalin
      a distinctively appropriating way. Linking kinds of (aesthetic) representation and ex-
      perience to kinds of subjects is crucial for our argument and has a pedigree in critical
      theoryandphenomenology.Onewell-knownexampleofsuchalinkappearsinMerleau-
      Ponty’s paper on Ce´zanne (1964). He mobilises Ce´zanne’s use of post-impressionist
      techniquestoexplorethephenomenologyofperceptionasitisaffordedthroughthelived
      body. Roughly, his point is that Ce´zanne reveals the falsifying idealisations of perfect

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1072                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      memesisinpainting,optingforatechniquethatinsteadcapturesappearancesastheyare
      functionalofalivedbody,abodythatmovesintimeandspacewithitsenvironment.The
      ‘picture-perfect’ clarity of the world in mimetic painting, as found in Renaissance
      paintings, is nothing like how the world appears to us. Perceptual phenomenology is
      fuzzy,variegatedintexture,focusandalignment,allrenderedasafunctionofembodied
      motion(1964:14).Aswewillsee,crucialinthisideaisatranscendentalmovethatcanbe
      traced back to Kant: that the spatio-temporal form of appearances are functional of the
      subject itself.20                                      
        Kant holds that there is a way the world is in-itself, but this is not the object of
      knowledge (1996: §§A248-9). It is the foundation of knowledge but only mediated by
      appearances; we know the world only as it appears to us (§§A246-7). This places the
      worldin-itselfandtheworldasitisfor-us,underthetranscendentalconditionsofsensible
      appearance, in an interesting situation. The world as it is in-itself stands as the un-
      knowableexteriorofknowledgewhichlimnsanddelineatesanepistemicinterior.21This
      interioristheworldofappearanceinwhichtheunknowable,unsayable,unrepresentable
      exterior is always already rendered as familiar, discrete, and object(ive) (A370-80). As
      rendered in appearance, the object world is as amenable to conceptual determination,
      economic exchange, political management, as it is to aesthetic appreciation (Adorno
      2004b, 178). Of course, all of this is done formally in Kant’s first and third critiques, a
      transcendental formalism that only touches the historical contingency of subjectivity in
      order to sublimate that very contingency as a source of objective (Stopford 2013) ne-
      cessity (Adorno 2001, 137).22                          
        Ihavediscussedthisideaindetailelsewhere23Forourpurposeshere,whatthisidea
      amounts to is a way of reparsing the noumenal and phenomenal world along a critical,
      postcolonialhermeneutics.Materiallyspeaking,theworld-in-itself,thenoumenalrealm,
      wasalwaysanabstractrealmofinfinitepromiseforthebourgeoissubjectaswefinditin
      Kant: an as-yet spatio-temporally undivided ‘space’. In the domain of empirical
      experience–thatis,theexperienceofthealreadyexplored,familiarworldoftheWestern
      subject – the work of the noumenal is formal: to underwrite and ground subjective
      experience, the necessity of which is indexed to those grounds. But what of the unex-
      plored world? The prospect of the unexplored world flips the dialectical values of
      contingencyandnecessityofexperience,andtherebyalsothecriticalrelationshipsofthe
      noumenalandphenomenologicalrealms.TheWesternsubjecttakestranscendentalsolace
      inthenecessaryformsoftheirempiricalexperienceasitisunderwrittenbynoumena.Yet,
      theempiricalworldthatisyettoappear,thatisliterallyunexplored,becomesanunlimited
      plenipotentiary of experience for the subject, again guaranteed by the necessity of the
      noumenalrealm.Indeed,betweenboththenoumenalandphenomenalrealms,thesubject
      finds its actual experience guaranteed, and also all possible future experiences. Kant
      thinksthatwe areentitledtoinferapriori thetranscendentalnecessity ofboth ourown
      forms of cognition, and of a world beyond appearance just from the form of actual,
      immediate empirical experiences. As such, just from actual experience (of the explored
      worldasitappearstous)thesubjectisgoodforcognitionofalltheunexploredworldtoo,
      and that unexplored world is guaranteed in advance to be amenable to the subject’s
      experiential demands.                                  

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1073     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        It is in this sense that the hegemonic white European subject is entitled to what it
      exploresbecauseitisbuiltintohowitseesitself,theworldandtherelationshipbetween
      thetwo.Gauguin’spaintingrendersthisphenomenologically;theambiguityofhisgazeis
      a pointing back towards the noumenal origins, as it were, of the women and the envi-
      ronmentasanundifferentiatedplenumreadytolicensethereality-carvingofGauguin’s
      gaze, and it points forward towards a point in time in which the women and nature are
      present as fully alienated objects, spatio-temporally speaking – objects that can then be
      managed in the economy of subject/object relations of colonial power. Materially
      speaking,Gauguincapturesthehistoricalpriorityofthecolonialgazeashelooksfromthe
      interiorityofhispositionintoanewlyrealisedportionofexteriority.Thesubjectposition
      (the painter or Western viewer alike) is marked by the interiority of the universal
      hegemonic space, unmarked, prior to, and before the painting. And the exterior – the
      deadened present of these ‘Tahitian bathers’, forever-fixed at the moment of their on-
      tologicalemergenceunderthecolonialgaze–istherendered,congealedspaceofobjects.
      Whatevertranscendentalsubjectivityissupposedtoaccruetothesewomen,themoment
      for their own realisation of it is already long lost.24
        IsGauguinmerelyappreciatingthesewomen?DoestheviewerappreciateGauguin?
      DotheyshareGauguin’sappreciation?AreGauguin’saestheticsmerelyanappreciation
      of‘Oriental’aesthetics?Asopposed,ineachcase,tosomeformofappropriation?Inthis
      paper, we have argued that these questions have already ceded the very ground where
      enquiry is meaningful. The irony being that even if one grants Gauguin or the Western
      viewer that they are appreciating not appropriating in this case, whatever this really
      means,wehavearguedthatappropriationisalreadybuiltintotheaestheticstructuresof
      representationinfrontofthem.Ofcourse,culturalappreciationasalreadyappropriationis
      notalways so starkly rendered as in the examples we have chosen. But the point is not
      aboutGauguin,orShriver,butaboutwhiteEuropeanentitlementtoaworldthatisalways
      available precisely because it is in principle, even if not in actuality, already taken.
        Are we saying by all this that hegemonic subjects cannot produce good art because
      ‘everythingisappropriation’?No,notexactly.Ourpointisthatculturalappropriationis
      anirreduciblefeatureofWesternunderstandingsofaestheticappreciation,notadomain
      thatonecancarveoutneatlytoproducegeneralnormativeprinciples:thatoneoughtor
      oughtnotbeabletowriteaboutorpaintx,forexample;or,thatoneoughtnotparticipate
      in any form of ‘cultural appreciation’. What is important is that people – artists and
      consumers of art alike – take a critical attitude tothemselvesand their particular socio-
      historicalandculturalrelationshipstoparticularartworks.Itmaybethatinlightofsuch
      critical reflections, one decides not to write, or paint about x; maybe not.
      ORCID iDs                                              
      JanaCattien https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7305-5174     
      RichardJohnStopfordhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0744-8724
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1074                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
       1. Hence for Gracyk, in this context, appreciation may be negative: I appreciate a manifest
         aesthetic flaw (Gracyk,2007:111).                   
       2. See Scarfidi (2005: 6–11; 96–7) for an unusual view, functional of liberal conceptions of
         commodityandproperty,wherebyappreciationandappropriationarenottreatedasdisjunctive
         but akindof admixture.                              
       3. ThischimeswiththeviewofculturalappropriationthatZiffandRao(1997)defend.Howto
         construct both the communities involved in cases of appropriation and the grounds for the
         wrongsofappropriationarethesubjectoftworecentpapers.NguyenandStrohlargueforan
         ‘intimacy-based’ account (2019); Matthes for a power-based account (2019). Whilst we are
         broadlyinagreementwithMatthes,wedrawuponthesubstantialworkofpostcolonial,critical
         anddecolonial theoristswho havebeenexploring power-basedaccountssince the 1970s.
       4. Weusetheterms‘hegemonic’and‘subaltern’heretoreflectdifferenthistoricalpositionings
         vis-a`-vis the project of European colonisation, between formerly colonising and colonised
         people. Weappreciate that the question of who isa ‘subaltern’,andwhether or not this ter-
         minologyisapt,isacomplexissueinitsownright(seeSpivak1988).Forcontrast,seeBrown’s
         ethnographic analysis of ‘appropriation’ in which he considers ‘appropriative’ dynamics
         between subaltern groups (2003, 251). We cannot argue against that view here; however,
         critically analysing appropriation along hegemonic lines avoids a flattening out of the dis-
         coursesof power –something herecognises would beproblematic.
       5. In the context of relentless anti-racist and decolonial mobilisations, this insistence on a
         generalised entitlement to cultural appropriation serves as a defence mechanism against the
         imminent loss of the cultural and political accoutrements that belong to the white European
         subject. Von Redecker (2020) has made this point in the context of her work on ‘phantom
         possession’,andwe thinkit applies equally toissues of culturalappropriation.
       6. See Chapter 3 of Root’s (1996) bookCannibal Culture for a materialist analysis of cultural
         appropriationofindigenousartandcultureinCanada.Thisisthekindofanalysisthatwehave
         in mindhere.                                        
       7. As Bhandar (2018) has shown, property ownership is central to the structure of European
         Enlightenment subjectivity. The systematic appropriation of the land and artefacts of mar-
         ginalisedpeopleisthereforealreadyimplied, asitwere,intheirconstitutiveexclusionfrom
         properlegalsubjecthood:‘Beinganownerandhavingthecapacitytoappropriatehavelong
         beenconsideredprerequisitesforattainingthestatusofthepropersubjectofmodernlaw,afully
         individuated citizen-subject’ (2018,5).             
       8. Hartmanemphasisesthecomingtogetherofsubjectiveentitlementandobjectiveconditionsof
         privatisationintheinstitutionofslavery:‘Thefungibilityofthecommoditymakesthecaptive
         bodyanabstractandemptyvesselvulnerabletotheprojectionothers’feelings,ideas,desires,
         and values: and as property, the dispossessed body of the enslaved is the surrogate for the
         master’sbodysinceitguaranteeshisdisembodieduniversalityandactsasthesignofhispower
         anddominion’ (1997,21).                             
       9. UnlikeHarris,whoinherwell-knownarticle‘WhitenessasProperty’(1993)foregroundshow
         whitenessisheldbywhitepersonsasaformofvaluableproperty,DuBois,accordingtoMyers,
         ‘emphasizes the tendency of white subjects to look upon the world – and specifically those
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1075     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         darker peoples and lands within it – as their property’. (2019, 12). Myers suggests that this
         tendencyencompasses,withoutbeinglimitedto,whatDuBoishaselsewherereferredtoasthe
         ‘wages of whiteness’ (2019, 23).                    
      10. Inherarticle,Myersproposesthatweunderstandthispossessiveorientationassomethinglike
         an‘embodied faith’ (2019,7).                        
      11. See:Staszak (2013,194–202).                        
      12. ForanextendeddiscussionofGauguin’stechniquesandtheir’origins’,seeGoldwater(1987,
         63–86).                                             
      13. Seee.g.Mulvey (1999,836)andSaid(2003: 14).         
      14. SeeChapters1&2ofRoot(1996)foranin-depthstudyofcolonialexoticizationandfetishism
         in aesthetics.                                      
      15. AsRootsuggests,thispromiseof‘discovery’,andthe‘fascination’withotherculturesthatit
         engenders,haslong‘beenawayfortheaesthetetoimagineanoutsidetotheexhaustionand
         disastersofEuropeanculture’(2006:20f).Inthisway,artservesasaneffectivealibiforfurther
         colonisation and conquest: precisely because ‘exotic’ peopleand cultures are still to be dis-
         covered, they areforevermarked forcolonisation andWestern interference (ibid.).
      16. SeeWeltenforasimilarpointthatGauguin’s‘Primitivism’requiresthedenialofitselfasaway
         of looking (2015,5).                                
      17. Technology is, of course, an enormously complex notion in its own right. We side with
         substantiveratherthaninstrumentalistviews–seeRoden(2015,150–1)–inthattechnology
         mediatesandconfigureshumansubjectivity andexperience–seeHeidegger (1977,12)and
         Adorno(2004a:63&1998:191–204)fortrajectoriesinthisthinking.Thepointhereisthat
         technologies as artifactual phenomena are not merely instruments for processing other phe-
         nomenaforintendedeffects,buttechnologyconfigures,mediates,transformsandtherebyhelps
         constitute thehuman.                                
      18. See Heidegger (2001, 33) and Merleau-Ponty (1964, 14) for exemplar phenomenological
         analyses of artworks.                               
      19. Root,forinstance,makesasimilarpointinherchapter‘AlibisofAppreciation’(1996,18–21).
      20. Whilst we think that Merleau-Ponty’s insight is a significant one, his transcendental phe-
         nomenologyisverymuchahegemonicphenomenology.Hetakesthelivedbodyasauniversal
         formofembodiedness-as-such.However,ashasbeenarguedincriticalphenomenology,from
         Young(1980),toAhmed(2000),toAlSaji(2019),thereisarguablynouniversalsubjectfrom
         which we can limn a universal form of experience as such. Subjects and their bodies are
         historical,socio-culturallymediatedentities.Whatitisforparticularhistoricalsubjectstoseeis
         notafunctionofauniversallivedbody,butabodybroughtintobeingbythesocio-culturaland
         historicalformationswhichproducesubjects.Wearenotgoingtoarguefortheseclaimshere,
         we take themto befurther insights.                  
      21. Kantwrestleswithwhatthismeanshimself:(§§307-8).Anditisapointofsomecontroversy
         astowhetherornothismetaphysics,ifwecanspeakinthisway,isa‘two-world’model–see
         Ameriks(1992,334)andStrawson(1982,250)contraAllison(2004,16).FollowingAdorno
         (2001, 105), we believe it is; however, we appreciate this is not settled in commentary. Re-
         gardless,ourargumentisnotscholarly,butawayofmobilisingKantascriticallensforthinking
         through broadbrushstroke ways for thinkingthrough relations between subjectandobjects.
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1076                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      22. Adorno argues that Kant was wrong about a universal subject, but considered historically
         speaking,heabsolutelyright:whatKantderivedtranscendentallywasnotauniversalstructure
         of empirical experience, but a contingent, historical form of subjectivity. It is an avatar of
         bourgeoissocio-cultural, political andeconomic relations (2004b, 250–1).
      23. A forerunner of this idea has precedent in Adorno’s critique of Kantian subjectivity and
         aesthetics. His basic idea is that Kantian transcendental subjectivity is a universalisation of
         capitalist labour relations. He argues that the Kantian formal, transcendental features and
         structures of experience are asublimation of bourgeois subjectivity. They are a kind of ma-
         chinerygearedtowardstheproductionofcognitivematerialamenabletoactualsocio-economic
         relations of exchange and profit (2004b, 178). If, for Kant, aesthetic experience involves a
         suspensionof‘interest’intheobject,Adornopointsoutthatthissuspensionofexperiencefrom
         theendsofprofitandexchangeisrecuperable.Thebourgeoissubjecttransfersthesourceofits
         pleasureawayfromtheobject.Itturnsitsattentionbacktowarditself,andtheveryfacilityofits
         own (cognitive) resources for processing appearances. Indeed, beautiful things, as proxy
         sourcesofself-reflexivebourgeoispleasure,becomecommoditiesparexcellence.(1997,62–3,
         345–6&14)Whilstontheonehandbeautifulartworksareuseless,thebourgeoisconnoisseur
         may exchange themfor whatever amount the market willpay.
      24. Foraninterestingcompetingviewofthispoint,seeWelten’sinterpretationoftheBathersin
         whichhearguesthere is acounter-gaze.(2015, 12).     
      References                                             
      Adorno,Theodor.2001.Kant’sCritiqueofPureReason.Trans.R.LivingstoneeditedbyR.Tiedemann.
         Cambridge:PolityPress.                              
      Adorno,Theodor.1997.Aesthetic Theory. Trans. RobertHullot-Kentor.London: Continuum.
      Adorno,Theodor.2004a.InTheCultureIndustry:SelectedEssaysonMassCulture,editedbyJ.M.
         Bernstein. London:Routledge.                        
      Adorno,Theodor.2004b.Negative Dialectics. Trans. E.B. Ashton. London:Routledge.
      Ahmed,Sara. 2000.Queer Phenomenology.Durham,NC: Duke University Press.
      Al-Saji, Alia. 2019. “Glued to the Image: A Critical Phenomenology of Racialization Through
         Worksof Art.”TheJournal of Aesthetics andArtCriticism 77(4): 475-488.
      Allison, Henry. 2004. Transcendental Idealism: An Interpretation and Defence. London: Yale
         University Press.                                   
      Ameriks,Karl.1992.“KantianIdealismToday.”HistoryofPhilosophyQuarterly9(3):329-342.
      Bhandar,Brenna.2018.ColonialLivesofProperty:Law,Land,andRacialRegimesofOwnership.
         Durham,NC: DukeUniversity Press.                    
      Brown,Michael F.2003.WhoOwns Native Culture?London:Havard University Press.
      Budd,Malcolm. 2008.Aesthetic Essays.Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.
      Cattien,Jana. 2023.‘Anti-Genderism andWhiteFeminist Reconstructions in Germany’.Signs.
      Coleman,ElizabethB.2004.“Appreciating‘Traditional’AboriginalPaintingAesthetically.”The
         Journal ofAesthetics andArtCriticism 62(3): 235-247.
      Davies, Stephen. 1987. “The Evaluation of Music.” In What Is Music? An Introduction to the
         Philosophyof Music,edited byPhilipAperson. NewYork:Haven.
      DuBois,W.E. B.2007. TheSouls ofWhite Folk.Oxford:Oxford University Press[1920].
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
      Cattien and Stopford                          1077     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fanon,Frantz.1967.BlackSkin,WhiteMasks.TranslatedbyMarkmannCharlesLam.NewYork:
         Grove Press.                                        
      Goldwater,Robert. 1987. Primitivism in ModernArt. London:Harvard University Press.
      Gracyk,Theodore.2007.ListeningtoPopularMusic:OrHowILearnedToStopWorryingAnd
         LoveLed Zeppelin.Ann Arbor:University of Michigan Press.
      Harris,Cheryl I.1993. “Whiteness as property.”Harvard Law Review 106(8):1707-91.
      Hartman,SaidiyaV.1997.ScenesofSubjection:Terror,Slavery,andSelf-MakinginNineteenth-
         CenturyAmerica.NewYork: OxfordUniversity Press.     
      Heidegger,Martin.2001.“TheOriginoftheWorkofArt”InPoetry,Language,Thought.Trans.A.
         Hofstadter. NewYork:Harper Perennial.               
      Heidegger,Martin.1977.TheQuestionConcerningTechnologyandOtherEssays.Trans.W.Lovitt.
         London:Garland Publishing.                          
      Heyd,Thomas.2003.“Rockartaestheticsandculturalappropriation.”JournalofAestheticsandArt
         Criticism 61(1): 37-46.                             
      Iseminger,Gary.2005.“Theaestheticstateofmind.”InContemporaryDebatesinAestheticsand
         the Philosophyof Art,edited byJerrold Levinson.Blackwell.
      Levinson,Jerrold.2016.AestheticPursuits:EssaysinPhilosophyofArt.Oxford:OxfordUniversity
         Press.                                              
      Matthes, E. H. 2019. “Cultural appropriation and oppression.” Philosophical Studies 179:
         1003-1013.                                          
      Merleau-Ponty,Maurice.1964.“Cezanne’sDoubt.”InSenseandNon-Sense,editedbyH.Dreyfus,
         andP.A.Dreyfus.Illinois: Northwestern University Press.
      Mulvey, Laura. 1999. “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.” Film Theory and Criticism: In-
         troductoryReadings,edited byLeo Braudy,andMarshall Cohen.Oxford:OUP.
      Myers, Ella. 2019. “Beyond the Psychological Wage: Du Bois on White Dominion.” Political
         Theory47: 6-31.                                     
      Nichols, Robert B. 2018. “Theft is Property! The Recursive Logic of Dispossession.” Political
         Theory46: 3-28.                                     
      Roden,D.2015. Posthuman Life: Philosophyat the Edgeof theHuman.Oxford: Routledge.
      Root,Deborah.1996.CannibalCulture:Art,AppropriationandtheCommodificationofDifference.
         Oxford:WestviewPress.                               
      Said,Edward. 1987.Orientalism: Western Conceptsof the Orient.Harmondsworth: Penguin.
      Scarfidi,Susan.2005.WhoOwnsCulture:AppropriationandAuthenticityinAmericanLaw.New
         York:Rutgers University Press.                      
      Shriver,Lionel.13thSeptember2016.LionelShriver’sFullSpeech.TheGuardian.https://www.
         theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/lionel-shrivers-full-speech-i-hope-the-concept-
         of-cultural-appropriation-is-a-passing-fad.         
      Spivak, Gayatri C. 1988. “Can the Subaltern Speak?” In Marxism and the Interpretation of Cul-
         tureCaryNelsonandLawrenceGrossberg,271–313.Basingstoke,GBR:MacmillanEducation.
      Staszak,Jean-Francois.2013.“TheArtistandtheTourist:GauguinInTahiti.”InTravel,Tourism
         andArtTijana.Rakic andJo-AnneLester.London:Ashgate. 
      Stopford, R. 2013. “The Transcendental Economy of Aesthetic Autonomy.” In Aesthetic and
         ArtisticAutonomy.Ed.O.Hulatt. London:Bloomsbury.    
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1078                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 49(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      Strawson, Peter F. 1982. The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason.
         London:Routledge.                                   
      Thi Nguyen, C., and M., Strohl. 2019. “Cultural Appropriation and the Intimacy of Groups.”
         Philosophical Studies 176:981-1002.                 
      Von Redecker, Eva. 2020. “Ownership’s Shadow: Neoauthoritarianism as Defense of Phantom
         Possession.”CriticalTimes 3(1): 33-67.              
      Welten, Rudd. 2015. “Gauguin and the Complexity of the Primitivist Gaze.” Journal of Art
         Historiography 12: 1-13.                            
      Young,IrisM.1980.“ThrowingLikeaGirl:APhenomenologyofFeminineBodyComportment
         Motility andSpatiality.”HumanStudies 3 (2): 137-156.
      Young,JamesO.andConradG.,Brunk,eds.2009.TheEthicsofCulturalAppropriation.Oxford:
         Blackwell Publishing.                               
      Young,James.2005.“ProfoundOffenseandCulturalAppropriation.”JournalofAestheticsandArt
         Criticism 63(2): 135-146.                           
      Ziff,Bruce,andRao,PratimaV.1997.“IntroductiontoCulturalAppropriation:AFrameworkfor
         Analysis.”InBorrowedPower:EssaysonCulturalAppropriation,editedbyBruceZiff,and
         Pratima V.Rao. NewJersey: RutgersUniversity Press.  
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             