[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2025,Vol.51(2)187–207
      A  Marxist reading of Ludwig                           
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2023   
      Wittgenstein:  Making  the case                        
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      for social and political change    sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537231170907
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Marc James Deegan                                     
      UniversityofOxford,UK                                  
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      ThisarticleoffersaMarxistreadingofWittgensteinandjuxtaposeshisfamousdictumthat
      philosophy‘leaveseverythingasitis’withtheideaoftransformativeaction.Iseektoalign
      thelaterphilosophyofWittgensteinwithMarx’s11ththesisonFeuerbach.Iadvancean
      unorthodoxviewinterpretingWittgensteinasanadvocateforsocialandpoliticalreform.
      Wittgenstein’s philosophy encourages us to imagine alternatives and contemplate
      concretepossibilitiesforchangingtheworld.Thedebateoperateswithinthephilosophy
      ofeducationanddrawsinspirationfromrelatedinquiriesinpolitical thoughtand,more
      specifically, from Marxist connections with Wittgenstein.
                                                             
      Keywords                                               
      Wittgenstein, philosophical investigations §124, Marx, 11th thesis on Feuerbach,
      educational philosophy, theory, action                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1. Introduction                                        
      Karl Marx properly criticises theorists for failing to take action. ‘The philosophers’, he
      maintains, ‘have only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to change it’
      (MarxandEngels2010,5).LudwigWittgensteinsaysthatphilosophy‘leaveseverything
      asitis’(Wittgenstein2001,§124).Inthisarticle,IofferaMarxistreadingofWittgenstein
      andseektoalignhislaterphilosophywithMarx’selevenththesisonFeuerbach.Iadvance
      an unorthodox view and present Wittgenstein as an advocate for social and political
      reform. Wittgenstein’s philosophy, I argue, encourages us to imagine alternatives and
      contemplate concrete possibilities for changing the world. This is significant since it
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      MarcJamesDeegan,TheBodleianLibrary,UniversityofOxford,UK.
      Email:marc.deegan@bodleian.ox.ac.uk                    
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      188                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      challenges conventional interpretations according to which section 124 of the Philo-
      sophical Investigations reverses the eleventh thesis. The debate is set within the phi-
      losophy of education and draws on connections between political thought and
      Wittgenstein and then, more specifically, on Marxist readings of him.
        Wittgenstein is not a social engineer or a political philosopher. He does not speak
      directly to the struggles of workers or to the uncovering and dismantling of hidden
      contradictions and asymmetries of power and privilege. He makes no formal links be-
      tweentheoryandpraxisinthecontextofsocialandpoliticalchange.Also,hedenounces
      philosophical theorising and certainly does not want philosophy to become the hand-
      maidenofscience.Itishardlysurprising,then,thatWittgensteinandMarxcanbeseento
      be worlds apart.                                       
        TheapproachIamtakingis,onthecontrary,presentedinthesamespiritasMarxist
      scholarswhoseektofinddeepcommonalitiesbetweenWittgensteinandMarx,showhow
      their respective world views are mutually enriching and who believe that the ideas and
      methodsofthesetwothinkerscanbeusedtoinformsocialandpoliticalcriticism.1Also,I
      takeNigelPleasants’cuethatWittgenstein’sphilosophicalapproach‘stimulatesacritical
      attitude towards traditionalphilosophical issues and problems’that ‘can be extended to
      reflecting upon, and questioning, aspects of social, political and moral life’ (Pleasants
      2002, 166).                                            
      2. Philosophy leaves everything as it is               
      In section 109 of the Philosophical Investigations Wittgenstein makes it plain that our
      considerationsintotheordinaryworkingsoflanguagearenotscientificonesandthatthere
      isnoroomto‘advanceanykindoftheory’.‘Wemustdoawaywithallexplanation’,he
      insists,‘anddescriptionalonemusttakeitsplace’.Moreover,ourphilosophicalproblems
      aresolved, notbydiscoveringnew experience,butby ‘arrangingwhat we havealways
      known’. Wittgenstein’s infamous maxim soon follows:    
                                                             
        Philosophymayinnowayinterferewiththeactualuseoflanguage;itcanintheendonly
        describe it.                                         
        For itcannotgive itanyfoundation either.             
                                                             
        It leaves everything as itis.                        
        Italsoleavesmathematicsasitis,andnomathematicaldiscoverycanadvanceit.A‘leading
        problem of mathematical logic’ is for us a problem of mathematics like any other.
        (Wittgenstein 2001, §124)2                           
        Sections125to133buttressWittgenstein’spositionthatphilosophyputseverythingin
                                                             
      plain view. It neither explains nor deduces anything. The aspects of things which are
      important are only hidden because of their simplicity and familiarity and, hence, our
      failuretonoticewhatisalwaysbeforeone’seyes.Ouraimisforconceptualclaritywhich
      weseektoachievebydemonstratingphilosophicalmethodsthat,likedifferenttherapies,
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         189     
                                                             
                                                             
      proceed by giving examples which eliminate difficulties and remove philosophical
      problems. And the business of philosophy is not to make discoveries in the way that
      science does, but to offer a clear view of, for example, the state of mathematics that
      troubles us.                                           
        How do Wittgenstein’s remarks sit within the field of educational philosophy? In
      particular,howdotheycaterforsocialandpoliticalcritique?Thestartingpointistoread
      section 124 in context (Smeyers 2017, 243) and appreciate that philosophy, or theory,
      doesnotleaveeverythingasitis(Standish2017,263).Factsintheworldmaynotchange
      butourunderstandingofthemchangesalongwiththeirsignificance.3Languageevolves
      and concepts are continuously revised, perhaps ‘by finding and inventing intermediate
      cases’(Wittgenstein2001,§122),andnewtermsareintroduced(suchaslanguage-games
      andfamilyresemblances)butnoneofthistakesplace,Wittgensteinrightlycontends,by
      inventing a new or ideal language or constructing a new symbolism – our language of
      everyday is ‘completely in order, as long as we are clear about what it symbolizes’
      (Waismann 1979, 45–6).4                                
        PaulSmeyersremindsusthatWittgenstein’sattackisprimarilyagainsttheoristswho,
      forinstance,usetheoriesthatresemblethosefoundinthescientificparadigmandwhich
      makecausal,andnotconceptualconnections,operateashypotheseswaitingtobetested
      byexperimentorexperienceingeneral,andwhichinvolvedeductionsandthedrawingof
      conclusions rather than providing descriptions by means of examples (Smeyers 2017,
      243–4). Wittgenstein is very much concerned with traditional philosophical problems
      (many of which traverse social, political and moral life) and does not want them to fall
      withintherealmofscience.5Viewinghisaphorisminthislight,PaulStandishproperly
      connectsitwiththethencommunityof‘scientific’philosophersincludingthemind-setof
      the author of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Standish 2017, 263).
        Section124servesasaheuristicaimedattheorists–andeducationalphilosophersno
      less – to think about the things we do in practice: the way we research, argue, draw
      conclusions, debate our theories and positions (in the senses Wittgenstein means) and
      publish our work. This has significant purchase given the interdisciplinary nature of
      research and teaching and, with it, the importance of recognising, as equally valid,
      differentepistemologies,stylesofreasoningandmethodsofinquiry.Indeed,ourdomains
      ofknowledge,oncesubjectedtoWittgenstein’sinvestigations,willnotremainthesame
      (Hacker1972,125–126).Nevertheless,howdoesWittgenstein’sphilosophyconnectwith
      the educational notion of transformative or emancipatory action? Here are some illus-
      trations or clues.                                     
        Bringing Wittgenstein’s language-games into the classroom allows us to change our
      perspectiveonhow we useand define conceptsand,in turn, reflect on their underlying
      premises(Edwards2019,676).Asresearchers,wecometolookattheworlddifferently
      and so we, too, change (Smeyers 2017, 247). As teachers, we can use works of art, for
      example,totriggerourstudents’imaginationtoseethingsintherightperspective–like
      whenwearesittinginatheatreandwatchinganactorperformamundanetask,say,lighting
      acigarette,‘observingahumanbeingfromoutsideinawaythatordinarilywecannever
      observeourselves’;where‘itwouldbelikewatchingachapterofbiographywithourown
      eyes’;something‘uncannyandwonderfulatthesametime’(Wittgenstein1980,4)–and,

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      190                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      as Adrian Skilbeck continues, our challenge is to ‘create the conditions under which
      studentsfeelwillingandpreparedtoexposethemselvestotherisksinvolvedinmaking
      claims through their art’ (Skilbeck 2017, 202–4).      
        JeffStickneysuggestswecantaketheleadfromscholarsinphilosophicalfeminism,
      ethicalphilosophyandpoliticalphilosophytoadvanceasocialreadingofWittgenstein’s
      laterworkinanefforttobringaboutpoliticalchangeandachievesocialjustice(Stickney
      2020, 8). Aligning Wittgenstein with Marx’s eleventh thesis on Feuerbach would cer-
      tainly speak to this. Stickney foresees educational philosophers playing a role in de-
      liveringadecolonisingeducationandthatthiswillchangeournaturalhistorybyaltering
      our language and forms of life (Id. 10). He writes:    
        HereIampossiblycaughtinacontradiction,asmyuseofWittgenstein’sphilosophydoesnot
        ‘leaveeverythingasitis’,butsidesmorewithMarxinseekingnotonlytodescribebutto
        change the world. (Ibid.)                            
                                                             
        Claudia Schumann points out that we can distinguish between the limits and the
      ‘possibilities of effecting change through theorizing’; and that, by advancing a positive
      criticalanalysis,we‘openupnewwaysofunderstanding’andareabletodevelop,among
      otherthings,the‘transformativepotentialoffeministpoliticalpractice’(Schumann2017,
      381 and 385).                                          
        ThisdiscussionleadsnaturallytomyunorthodoxviewthatWittgenstein’sphilosophy
      is an instrument for social and political change. In educational philosophy, Maxine
      Greene’spioneeringworkon‘lookingatthingsasiftheycouldbeotherwise’6runsalong
      the same Wittgensteinian tracks that head towards imagining alternatives and contem-
      platingconcretepossibilitiesforchangingtheworld.Herewecanutiliseherthesisthatby
      mediating with creative and imaginative works such as literature, poetry, sculpture,
      theatre,film,musicanddanceweempowerourstudentstotearapartthe‘cottonwoolof
      daily life’ (Greene 2018, 185) and imagine better worlds for themselves (Greene 2017,
      494–5and500–1;andGreene2018,15,163,185–6and196);invitethemtoengagewith
      the ‘imaginary mode of awareness’ and ‘break with the taken-for-granted, with the
      ordinary and the mundane’ (Greene 2018, 181); and encourage them to take transfor-
      mative action to ‘repair the lacks, to move through the openings, to try to pursue real
      possibilities’ (Id. 223). Greene writes:               
        Imagination,afterall,allowspeopletothinkofthingsasiftheycouldbeotherwise;itisa
        capacitythatallowsalookingthroughthewindowsoftheactualtowardsalternativerealities.
        (Greene 2017,494–5)                                  
        Theimaginativeleaprequiredtoleadtotransformativepraxisis,moreover,dependent
      on‘seeingthingscloseupandlarge’(Greene1995,16).Nolongerseeingthingssmall,
      fromasafedistance,andasmereobjects–inthewaywemayhavepreviouslylookedat
      ‘schoolingthroughthelensesofasystem’(Id.11),weseepeopleandthingsforwhom
      and what they truly are. And this passion for seeing the world big is the ‘doorway for
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         191     
                                                             
                                                             
      imagination’, where there is the ‘possibility of looking at things as if they could be
      otherwise’ (Id. 16).                                   
        MovingonthesametracksisJose´Medina’sworkon‘resistantimaginations’.7Hesays
      weshouldexploretheroleimaginationplaysinourepistemiclivesandespeciallywhen
      we are contemplating epistemic alternatives (Medina 2013, 53). We have to resist os-
      sification, he insists, and reimagine our generic categories (man, woman, white, black,
      straight,gay,etc.).Toremaintrulyaliveandtoceasefollowingthepathofleastresistance
      we need the assistance of:                             
        aresistantimagination—animaginationthatisreadytoconfrontrelationalpossibilitiesthat
        have beenlost, ignored,or that remain tobediscovered orinvented. (Id.299)
                                                             
                                                             
      3. Lessons from political thought                      
      AliceCrarypresentsanin-depthanalysisofthesignificanceofWittgenstein’sphilosophy
      for political thought (Crary 2000). Her concern with the ongoing debate between a
      popularinterpretationonwhichWittgensteinadvancesaviewofmeaningthatthreatensto
      ruleoutthepossibilityofsocialandpoliticalcriticismand,insomeinstances,labelshis
      work as deeply conservative and a more progressive reading on which Wittgenstein’s
      thoughtshedslightonourdesiretoinstigatesocialandpoliticalchange,evenradicalor
      revolutionarychangeisthatbothpositionsmisinterpretWittgenstein’sviewofmeaning
      and are not able to highlight how his philosophy informs political thought.8
        Crary seeks to present a more plausible account of the relevance that Wittgenstein’s
      philosophyholdsforpoliticalthoughtbyclarifyinghisviewofmeaning.Shearguesthat
      Wittgenstein’saccountofmeaningdoesnotcommithimtotheviewthatmeaningisfixed
      independentlyofuseorthatusefixesmeaning(Id.131).Meaningsarenotfixedandwe
      havenoneedtoassumemetaphysicalvantagepointsbeforewecanbegintocritiqueour
      social and political practices. Rather, Wittgenstein wants us to bring ‘meaning’ and
      ‘criticism’ back from their metaphysical to their everyday use (Id.138). We can in fact
      submitallaspectsofourlivestocriticismbuttheremaywellbeoccasionswhen‘wehave
      nonotionwhat(ifanything)willcountasthefulfilmentofthewordsweareuttering’;in
      this sense there are limits on our critical endeavours (Id. 139–140). Nevertheless
      Wittgenstein, Crary concludes:                         
        presents us with a view of the conditions of human knowledge on which there is human
        activityintheformsofthoughtandspeechweuseinattemptingtounderstandtheworld:here
        gettingatthefactsofasituationmayrequireustotryandseeitinadifferentlight,touseour
        imagination in a variety of ways, to seek new experiences which help us to refine our
        sensitivitiesandsoon.Wittgenstein’swritingsinthisrespectteachussomethingaboutthe
        kindofchallengeweconfrontwhenweturntoinvestigatingestablishedmodesofthought
        andspeech(suchasthosethatbeardirectlyonpoliticallife),sortingouttheirinjusticesand
        developing morerigorously just andconsistentways of thinkingandspeaking. (Id.141)
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      192                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
        Everythingthatliesinplainviewisopentoquestion.9Wittgensteinencouragesusto
      critiqueoursocialandculturalpractices.Philosophydoesnotfreezeourformsoflife,our
      debatesorourmodesofcriticism.Quitetheopposite,itinvitesus,asCraryrightlysays,to
      look at things afresh, to use our imagination and seek new challenges in the ways we
      confront and negotiate the world. Wittgenstein writes: 
        Thesicknessofatimeiscuredbyanalterationinthemodeoflifeofhumanbeings,anditwas
        possibleforthesicknessofphilosophicalproblemstogetcuredonlythroughachangedmode
        of thought andof life, not throughamedicine invented byanindividual.
                                                             
        Supposetheuseofthemotor-carproducesorencouragescertainillnesses,and[humankind]
        isplaguedbysuchillnessuntil,fromsomecauseorother,astheresultofsomedevelopment
        or other, itabandonsthe habit of driving.(Wittgenstein 1967aI,II,§4)
        In her seminal work, Wittgenstein and Social Justice, Hannah Pitkin argues that
      philosophy’ssuccessliesinshowingthe‘deepnecessities’ofourconceptualsystem—the
      veryconceptsthat‘reflectourmostcentralformsoflife’andarealteredbythem(Pitkin
      1972,298).Theseconceptsare,tobesure,intimatelyconnectedwithoursocial,political
      andmorallives.10Inherview,‘WittgensteinisveryclosetoMarx’andtheelevenththesis
      onFeuerbachisparalleltoWittgenstein’sideathatthesicknessofatimeiscuredbyan
      alteration in our modes of life (Id. 340).11           
        The Grammar of Politics: Wittgenstein and Political Philosophy represents a col-
      lection of insightfulessays that demonstratethe relevance of Wittgenstein’s methods to
      politicalthought.12Inaddressingthequestion,Whatispolitical?AllanJaniksuggestswe
      assemble‘Wittgensteinianremindersoftheroleofthepoliticalinhumanexperiencethat
      enableustograsphowpoliticsfitsintohumannaturalhistory’(Janik2003,101).Politics
      permeates our ‘everyday concepts and conflicts’; and the ‘solution to our political
      problems’, he argues, ‘comes in the way we live, not in the theories we hold’ (Ibid.).13
      Clearly our practices have their own political significance. Janik’s analysis of the in-
      terrelationbetweenfamilyresemblanceconceptsandtheactivityofrule-following(which
      itselfmanifestsacertainregularityinhumanbehaviourthatlimitsthewaysinwhichour
      practices can be altered) leads him to conclude:       
        Tochangesocietyhastoentailnotsimplychangingtherulingideas(thesubstanceofthe
        rules we abideby) butchanging ourmode of rule-following itself.(Id.115)
        Critical reflection on our social and political practices can bring about change. I am
      presentingWittgensteinasareformerinjustthissense.JamesTully’sexpositionofour
      practices of critical reflection connects with this approach (Tully 2003). Rather than
      resortingtotheoryortorelyingonasingleformofcriticalreflectionasafoundation,our
      pressingpoliticalissuesareresolvedinpracticeandcommencebysurveyingourdiverse
      language-gamesofreflection.14Inthecourseofouractivitiesofcriticalreflection,what
      we take for granted and what we call into question and reflect on are ‘provisional and
      subject to change and reversal over time’ (Id. 28–29). Tully writes:
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         193     
                                                             
                                                             
        ournewunderstandingofthenon-foundationalandconditionalroleofpracticesofcritical
        reflectiongivesaclearerviewofthediverseformstheytakeandtheboundary-challenging
        ways free critical reflection both rests onandquestions itsown conditionality.(Id.34)
        Tully adopts Wittgenstein’s metaphor of language as an ancient city (Wittgenstein
      2001,§18)toillustratethemazeoflittlestreetsandsquaresofoldandnewhousesthat
      frequentourpracticesofcriticalreflection(Tully2003,41).Herightlyconcludestheonly
      guarantor of our free and critical life is the wisdom to accept and work within the
      ‘enlighteningmultiplicityofconceptionsofcriticalreflectionavailabletous’.Wecanuse
      them‘toreflectcriticallyon,ourwell-troddenwaysofthoughtandaction,renderingthem
      lessindubitablyfoundational,andtherebydisclosingpossibilitiesofthinkingandacting
      differently’(Ibid.).Inthiswayweareabletousecriticalconceptstoaddressoursocial,
      political and moral questions.                         
        Further,ifweareabletoidentifywiththevoicesrepresentedintheinternaldialoguein
      the Philosophical Investigations then, as Richard Eldridge explains, we are given a
      ‘chancetorecognizeinanewwaywhatwedoandmightdoinjudging,inpoliticsandin
      otherdomains’(Eldridge2003,120–1).Wittgenstein’sremarkthatphilosophy may not
      interferewiththeuseoflanguagebutonlydescribeitdoesnothavetobeseentoendorse
      political conservatism or traditionalism even in hard cases. Eldridge takes up Stanley
      Cavell’s‘argumentoftheordinary’andshowshowbyparticipatinginthe‘conversation
      of justice’ we are able to move between different positions and work within a political
      framework of affirmative tolerance and mutual respect (Id. 124–128).
        Eldridge and Crary’s essays are consistent with my argument that Wittgenstein’s
      philosophy encourages us to imagine other vistas and work on building avenues for
      changing the world. I close this section with Denis McManus’ proposal to sketch a
      Wittgensteinian model for radical political critique (McManus 2003, 63). The key is to
      work through what Wittgenstein means by ‘nonsense’ and rehabilitate a ‘conception of
      “nonsense” as a term of criticism for the political thinker’ (Id. 65–66).15 His notion of
      ‘political imagination’ is intended to rescue the lives that animate our practices (and
      thereforethesenseormeaningfulnessthatattachestothem);tostopthemfromslipping
      away (Id. 77). McManus concludes:                      
        we can make sense of a species of reflection on our situation which reveals a species of
        nonsenseinourlivesandprovidesaWittgensteinianmodelforradicalpoliticalchange.The
        model hopefully captures the difficulty and seriousness of such thought, the rare kind of
        insightrequired,andjusthowmuchisatstake.Theviceweseektoexposeisnotspeaking
        falselyoractingcontrarytoprinciple.Ratheritisthedescentofourtalkintomeaningless
        chatter andour action into token gesture.(Id. 81)    
      4. Looking at §124 of the Philosophical Investigations through a
      Marxist lens                                           
      NowwereachthecruxofthematterandseehowaMarxistreadingofWittgensteincan
      furthersupportboththealignmentofhislaterphilosophywithMarx’selevenththesison
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      194                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      Feuerbach and place Wittgenstein as an advocate for changing our forms of social ex-
      istence.Inrespectofmyfirsttask,TerrellCarverquestionswhetherMarx’sretortabout
      what philosophers should do and what philosophy should be ‘could be very close to
      Wittgenstein’s parable of philosophers as flies in fly-bottles’ or ‘it could be something
      verydifferentandveryconfused’;andtheanswerdependsonwhatreadersbringtothese
      remarksandwhattheyintendtodowiththem(Carver2002,103–104).HereIagreewith
      K.T.FannthatWittgenstein’sphilosophyisatoolthatisentirelyuselessifyouarenotafly
      trappedinthefly-bottleorareotherwisequitecontenttostaythere(Fann2002,285).16
        Inmyview,WittgensteinandMarxchallengewhatwemeanwhenwesaywearedoing
      philosophy. They rupture what we take for granted. Carver rightly says that both phi-
      losophers do not approve of the practice of philosophy as it is performed by their
      contemporaries. As an activity, Wittgenstein and Marx are ‘concerned with doing
      something – such that their contemporaries would be drawn up short and their self-
      understandings,andunderstandingsoftheworld,disturbed’(Carver2002,104).Indeed,a
      theoryofrevolutionarypraxismaywellhavebeeninWittgenstein’smindandlifethough,
      unlike Marx, it is not readily transparent in his works (Id. 107).17
        Moira De Iaco takes issue with reconciling Wittgenstein’s philosophy with Marx’s
      notionoftransformingtheworldgiventhat,forWittgenstein,philosophy‘mustlimititself
      to leaving everything as it is’ (De Iaco 2021, 25). ‘Wittgenstein’s philosophy does not
      have,’inherview,‘thepurposeofchangingsocietythroughthethoughtandrethinkingof
      language.Itdoesnotlookatsociety’(Id.26).18DeIacoaccusesWittgensteinoffocusing
      onthe‘roleofpraxisinthemeaningprocessesoflanguage’without‘consideringthese
      processes from an historical point of view’ (Ibid.). Wittgenstein’s emphasis is on re-
      forming metaphysically-inclined philosophers hell-bent on misusing language19 rather
      than appreciating the wider role that ‘real historical circumstances’ play in determining
      thoughts, actions and events (Id. 28).20               
        Even if De Iaco is correct in her reading of his work, can we not choose to read
      Wittgensteinfromthepointofviewofanabsence?IfwetakeNancyFraser’scue21,we
      canextrapolatefromthingsWittgensteindoessaytothingshedoesnotandreformulate
      hisconceptionofpraxisasifhehadconsideredthehistoricalperspective.Nevertheless,
      DeIacodoesattempttoclosethisgapbysuggestingwecanuseWittgenstein’smethodfor
      analysing linguistic usage in a manner which complements the way we use ‘Marxist
      conceptual tools’ to ‘investigate the social-historical processes that affect language and
      real life with which language is intertwined’ (Id. 26). Our tool-box for addressing
      ‘concrete linguistic uses’ is, in other words, strengthened by combining these comple-
      mentary aspects of Marxist and Wittgensteinian philosophies (Id. 28–29).
        Robert Vinten is right, in my view, to suggest that the underlying tensions between
      Wittgenstein and Marx dissolve once we appreciate the different ways in which both
      thinkers approach the nature of philosophy (Vinten 2013, 10).22 ‘Wittgenstein’s eluci-
      datory philosophy’, he argues, ‘does not obviously conflict with Marx’s emancipatory
      philosophy’ if we accept that Wittgenstein engages in different tasks from those per-
      formedbyMarxists(Id.13).23Thereisnobarrier,Vintenconcludes,tocombiningboth
      philosophical approaches in our practical endeavours (Id. 22).24 They are, to be sure,
      mutually enriching.                                    

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         195     
                                                             
                                                             
        Thequestionconcerningtheextentofthetensionbetweentheclaimsthatphilosophy
      leaves everything as it is and that philosophers ought to change the world, not merely
      interpretitisraiseddirectlybyRupertRead.Heisrighttoclaimthat‘Unlesslanguagecan
      takecareofitself,therecanbenotakingcareofit’;and,inthisrespect,philosophy‘leaves
      language as it is’ (Read 2002, 256). Read finds points of convergence between Witt-
      genstein and Marx25 and answers:                       
        Marx’s approach, like Wittgenstein’s, has to be seen as essentially practical, getting one
        primarilynottothinksomethingonedoesn’tthink,buttodosomethingonedoesn’twantto
        do.And,moregenerally,thatresourcesareavailabletous—withinMarx,withinourlivesand
        experiences,oursocieties,within‘commonsense’—bothtoavoid‘idea-ism’andtoembrace
        avisionandpracticeofchangingtheworld(includingimportantly,asWittgensteinwould
        emphasise,oneself).Ofcourse,tosaythisstilldoesnotintheslightestimplythatitwillbe
        easyto do.(Id.272)                                   
                                                             
        Read seeks to fill the lacuna by suggesting that Marx could have endorsed section
      124 of the Philosophical Investigations and much of Wittgenstein’s philosophy and
      methods and that Wittgenstein, in turn, could have endorsed Marx’s eleventh thesis on
      Feuerbachandthathe,Wittgenstein,was‘notagainstchangingthings(evenbymeansof
      philosophy)’(Id.274).26Heconcludesthatthereisa‘fit’betweenWittgensteinandMarx
      and ‘the point may indeed very much be still to change the world’ (Id. 275). Witt-
      genstein’s philosophy may appear more ‘individualist’ than Marx’s, Reid writes, but
      Wittgenstein does not want us to work upon ourselves ‘in a narrow and introspective
      way’;ratherhehopesthatthedarknessofourtime‘mightbealteredbypeopletakingup
      his work and using it to think (and act) with’ (Id. 277).
        Despite the popular image of Wittgenstein as a ‘deeply apolitical thinker’, a closer
      inspection of the ‘biographical and broader historical context of his life and thought,’
      Dimitris Gakis remarks, ‘reveals a number of interesting connections to Marx(ism)’
      (Gakis2021,8)—some of whichwe have discussed. He reiteratesour finding that they
      shareacriticalattitudethatapproachesphilosophyasa‘matterofpraxisandmethod’as
      distinctfroma‘mystifying,metaphysicaltradition’couchedin‘doctrineordogma’(Id.
      11). It is here, Gakis continues, that their outlooks ‘converge on the potentially trans-
      formationalandemancipatorycharacterofphilosophy’(Id.11–12).Tothisheaddstheir
      connections between philosophical and everyday human activity (and how theoretical
      problemsaredissolvedinpracticallife)andthenarguesthatMarx’selevenththesisand
      Wittgenstein’saphorismthatphilosophyleaveseverythingasitis(‘withthe“everything”
      ranging over the use of language’) may be taken to be in fact complementary and not
      opposed (Id. 12–13). Gakis concludes that Wittgenstein’s philosophy is of ‘critical
      importance from a political point of view’ (Id. 15).   
        OnecontactpointthatMarcoGigantepursuesbetweenWittgensteinandMarxisthe
      ‘attributiontophilosophicalthought,understoodaspraxis,ofthepowertotransformthe
      real’, the power to transform social relations (Gigante 2021, 42). He discusses Marx’s
      elevenththesisandWittgenstein’sremarksontheroleofphilosophyastherapy27andits
      task to leave everything as it is (Id. 48–49). Gigante couples Wittgenstein’s account of
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      196                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      language with the transformative power of philosophy advanced by Marx (Id. 49–50).
      ‘Both philosophers,’ he says, ‘show the instruments for carving out a different role for
      [philosophy’s]exerciseandthereforefortheuseofitsowndemystifyingpower’(Id.50).
      This task does not involve new interpretations of the world, Gigante continues, but the
      ‘description of the logics of social life’ that are always before one’s eyes and the un-
      derstanding that enables us to ‘identify and remove the conditions that alone can
      transform them or give rise to other forms of life’. He concludes:
        MarxandWittgensteinaimatmakingphilosophyaninstrumentofcriticism,atoolbywhich
        men andwomen can more and more effectivelyrecognize the contingent character of the
        ideological constructions they are surrounded by; that is, in doing so, the philosophical
        discoursebecomesapracticeoftransformation,awaytochangetheprocessofdescription
        andinterpretation of the worlditself. (Ibid.)28      
                                                             
        We have already started to touch upon the emancipatory or transformative power of
      Wittgenstein’s later philosophy. Moving onto my second task, and drawing on further
      insights from Marxist thinking, I now wish to investigate the possibilities that Witt-
      genstein’sphilosophyholdsforreformingoursocialexistence.Thefirstthingtonoteis
      thataphilosophershouldnotfindhimorherselftrappedwithinanyparticularcommunity
      ofideas.Weallholdcertainbeliefsandvalues.And,notsurprisingly,wearemembersof
      differenthumancommunitiesbut,asphilosophers,weneedtokeepourcriticaldistance
      and try and see them for what they are.29 ‘The philosopher is not a citizen of any
      community of ideas’, Wittgenstein insists, and this is precisely ‘what makes him into a
      philosopher’ (Wittgenstein 1967b, §455).               
        T.P.Uschanovsaysthatthisremarkis‘thecoreofWittgenstein’sattitudetowardsthe
      mixingofphilosophyandpolitics’(Uschanov2002,38).Asphilosophers,weshouldnot
      treattheideasofoneideologymorefavourablythatthoseofanother;rather,weshouldbe
      content to support our preferred political party’s ideas ‘from without’ (Ibid). Uschanov
      alsocitesCavell’srelatedpointthat‘whenphilosophersdochangethings,there’snothing
      abouttheirbeingphilosophersthatspeciallyenablesthemtodothis’(Id.39).Philosophy
      leaving everything as it is does not mean that philosophers are estopped from trying to
      changetheirsociety.Individualsandmovementsarefreetoworkonchangingthingsonly
      that philosophy by itself, theory to be precise, will not get them there.30
        The‘obviouspoint,’Pleasantsexplains,isthat‘tosayphilosophyleavesthingsasthey
      areneitherentailsnorimpliesthattheyshouldbeleftastheyare’;and,inlinewithMarx’s
      elevenththesis,the‘naturalimplicationis,then,thatifonereallywantstochangethings,
      doing philosophy is not the way to go about it’ (Pleasants 2002, 169). He says we can
      bringWittgenstein’sSocraticpresentationoftheremindersaboutthings‘wehavealways
      known’buthavesince forgottenormisplaced31tobear ontheproblems thattroubleus
      withoutresortingtoanyspecialphilosophicalinsightorexplanatorytheory(Id.164).The
      questforuniversalcriticalstandardsremains‘chimerical’(Id.174–175).Descriptionthat
      promotes changing how people see their reality is what is needed, not explanation that
      unearths its ‘hidden essence’ (Id. 177).               
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         197     
                                                             
                                                             
        PleasantsdemonstrateshowWittgenstein’sremarks–relatingtochangingthewaywe
      lookatthings32,theconsiderableeffortofwillratherthanintellectrequiredtomakesuch
      changes33 and his appeal that we ‘look and see. . . don’t think, but look’34 – form an
      essentialpartofhisphilosophyasatherapeuticprocessandwhichiscapableofproducing
      achangeinattitude;andthatwecanextendandapplyWittgenstein’s‘wayofseeing’to
      new problems provided they are of ‘personal interest and significance’ (Id. 165). This
      approach,hesays,connectswithMarx’smaximonchangingtheworld;and‘stimulatesa
      critical attitude towards traditional philosophical issues and problems’ that is key to
      challenging ‘aspects of social, political and moral life’ (Id. 166).35
        Thepointofa‘radicalsocialcritique’–onewhichstrikesattheheartofoursocialand
      political foundations – is, Pleasants continues, ‘somehow to get the participants them-
      selves to see and share one’s critical view’ (Id. 175). He writes:
        Thetaskofthesocialcriticisnotatheoreticalone;rather,thedesideratumistochangethe
        waypeopleseetheirrelationswiththeirfellowcreaturesandtheirenvironment.Andwith
        that changeof seeing comes change inacting. (Ibid.)  
        Dog˘an Go¨cmen and Dog˘an Baris Kilinc discuss what Wittgenstein and Marx un-
      derstandbycriticisingtheworldandwhattheirintentionsareindoingso.Marxisintent
      on changing the world and Wittgenstein wants to resolve philosophical problems by
      addressing language problems occurring in the real world (Go¨cmen and Kilinc 2021,
      53).36Thepraxisoflanguage,theysuggest,shouldbetakeninawidesenseinrespectof
      both philosophers (Id. 64). They conclude:             
                                                             
        In the Tractatus [Wittgenstein] presents how the proposition, language, and thought were
        gainedfromtheworldandnowintheInvestigationshesuggeststhattheyreturntotheworld
        intheactionsofsociallyembeddedindividualstochangetheworld.Theaimofchangingthe
        worldistoestablishanethicallife,notbeyondgoodandevil,butbeyond‘punishmentand
        reward’. This is also the principle Marx seems to employ as the basis of his theory of
        socialism. (Ibid.)                                   
        Antonia Soulez conceives of Wittgenstein’s ‘praxis of the use of language’ as an
      activity in a social or institutional sense that nevertheless has indirect political impli-
      cations (Soulez 2021, 171–4). And while Wittgenstein does not aim for social trans-
      formation through,forexample,a‘politicallyactiveprogramme’,shedoesaskhowwe
      may relate his idea of the transformation of oneself to taking action in the world (Id.
      173).37 How does self-improvement lead to emancipatory action? Soulez says we can
      read Wittgenstein’s approach ‘as critical even in a social sense, even though it is not
      overtly political’ (Id. 176). This must be right.38 Employing Aldo Gargani’s reading of
      Wittgenstein, moreover, we should dispense with the traditional philosopher’s task of
      ‘applyingmodelstoreality’;acceptthatrealityis‘irregularanduneven’andthatit‘cannot
      bedealtwithusingexacttools’;andthatwemustadjustone’stoolstomeet‘contingent,
      uneven realities’ (Id. 177). Of Wittgenstein, she writes:
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      198                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
        he certainly provided us with the epistemological tools useful for building a political
        conceptionofconstructivemodelsthatcouldshedlightonpraxisasapoliticallylinguistic
        activity through the reversal of thevery-relation ofmodel to real.(Id. 178)
        The last step in my unorthodox advancement of Wittgenstein as an advocate for
      transformationalchangeandtheuseofhisphilosophytoopenupnewhorizonsisafforded
      by Marco Brusotti. He reads the later Wittgenstein as a philosopher who takes up a
      ‘contemplative’stancethatisnon-causalandatoddswithscience(Brusotti2021,185–6).
      But what does ‘contemplative’ mean here? Exploring Wittgenstein’s conversation with
      Rush Rhees, Brusotti suggests that ‘consideration’ and ‘comparison’ are what Witt-
      genstein isdriving atandthatWittgenstein’s‘contemplativephilosopher’isfocusedon
      showing other possibilities, other ways in which things might be done (Id. 186–187).
      Wittgensteinis,itseemstomeatleast,anticipatingGreene’snotionoflookingatthingsas
      if they could be otherwise.                            
        Thereareandalwayswillbe‘otheranddifferentwaysofsocialexistence’(Id.187).
      Further,thereasonwhyacontemplativephilosopheris‘concernedwithpointingoutother
      possibilities’andtomakecomparisonsis,Brusottisays,‘understanding’.Thismaywell
      include imagining ‘circumstances and surroundings in which a familiar institution or
      activitymayloseitspoint’(Ibid.).Wittgensteinis,tobesure,callingthenecessityofour
      institutions into question.39 He is asking us to consider ‘alternatives, even imaginary
      possibilitiesthatshowtheallegednecessitytobecontingent’(Ibid.).Thisinsightshows
      how Wittgenstein’s ‘contemplative’ philosopher is able to challenge our political
      landscapeandenvisionalternativesinthenameofdemocracyandsocialjustice.Brusotti
      continues:                                             
        Forthephilosopher,alternativepossibilitiesaremereobjectsofcomparisoninordertobetter
        understand a familiar cultural phenomenon. Even when this phenomenon seems to be
        necessary and unique, the ethnological eye looks at it as something that could have been
        otherwise. (Id.188)                                  
                                                             
      5. Conclusion                                          
      I have sought to provide a Marxist reading of Wittgenstein and show how his later
      philosophy aligns with Marx’s eleventh thesis on Feuerbach rather than reverses it.
      WorkingwithineducationalphilosophyIpresentedWittgensteinasanadvocateforsocial
      andpoliticalreformandforegroundedtheemancipatoryortransformationalpowerofhis
      later philosophy. The unorthodoxy expressed by my ideas is, I believe, consistent with
      emerging trends in political philosophy and Marxist thinking that offer different per-
      spectives on how we may interpret Wittgenstein’s philosophy and methods and which
      underscore their significance for tackling democratic and social justice issues.
        IintroducedWittgenstein’saphorismthatphilosophy‘leaveseverythingasitis’inthe
      context of several related sections in the Philosophical Investigations. To shed light on
      how Wittgenstein’s remarks might cater for social and political criticism I drew on
      educationalphilosopherstooffersomeillustrationsandclues.ItookcomfortinStickney’s
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         199     
                                                             
                                                             
      suggestion that we should take the lead from scholars in other disciplines to advance a
      socialreadingofWittgenstein’sworkthatcatersforbringingaboutchange.Ilinkedthis
      withGreene’sconceptionof‘lookingatthingsasiftheycouldbeotherwise’andMedina’s
      idea of ‘resistant imaginations’.                      
        Turning to political thought I discussed insights from Crary, McManus and Pitkin. I
      agreedwithTullythattheonlyguarantorofafreeandcriticallifeisthewisdomtoengage
      withthediversityoftheconceptionsofcriticalreflectionavailabletous.Iexpressedthe
      view that Crary and Eldridge’s ideas were consistent with my argument that Wittgen-
      stein’s philosophy encourages us to imagine alternatives and to build bridges that may
      lead to change.                                        
        My discussion then focused on Marxist’s readings of Wittgenstein and included
      pertinent comments from Carver, Gigante, Go¨cmen and Kilinc, Pleasants, Soulez,
      Uschanov and Vinten. I agreed with Fann that Wittgenstein’s philosophy is entirely
      uselessifyouarenotaflytrappedinWittgenstein’sfly-bottleofphilosophicalbafflement
      or are quite happy just to stay there. I acknowledged De Iaco’s criticism that Wittgen-
      stein’sphilosophydoesnothavetheaimofchangingsocietybecause,inherview,itlacks
      the requisite socio-historical perspective. I argued we can take Fraser’s cue and read
      Wittgenstein from the point of view of an absence and incorporate that perspective.
        InotedRead’ssuggestionthatMarxcouldwellhaveadoptedsection124andmuchof
      Wittgenstein’s philosophy and methods and that, equally, Wittgenstein could have en-
      dorsedMarx’selevenththesis.Readconcludedthatthereisameaningful‘fit’betweenthe
      twophilosophersandthattheirpointistochangetheworld.Also,consistentwiththeidea
      that Wittgenstein and Marx share a critical attitude in which philosophy is a matter of
      praxis and method, Gakis rightly contended that their outlooks converge on the trans-
      formational character of philosophy and concluded that Wittgenstein’s dictum is com-
      plementary to Marx’s eleventh thesis.                  
        My last step was to take up Brusotti’s notion of Wittgenstein as the ‘contemplative’
      philosopherwhofocusesonfindingotherpossibilities,otherwaysinwhichthingsmight
      be done. I made the connection here with Greene’s work and now say that the use of
      Medina’s ‘resistant imaginations’ would further compliment the contemplative philos-
      opherinhisorhertaskofcallingintoquestiontheallegednecessityofourinstitutions.
      Thisinsight,Iargued,demonstrateshowWittgenstein’s‘contemplative’philosophercan
      takeupMarx’sgauntletandnotonlyinterprettheworld,butchangeit.Again,toborrow
      fromFraser,Wittgensteinisinvitingustocutourteethonthestrugglesandwishesofour
      age (Fraser 1989, 113).                                
        I close with these thoughts from Gavin Kitching:     
        Wittgensteinfoundavoice—aformofspeakingandwriting—thatisappropriate,anddeeply
        appropriate,notjustfordoingphilosophyinapostmodern,highlyindividualised,bourgeois
        democratic society, but also a voice which is equally appropriate for doing political and
        ethical and religious and aesthetic debate (both with others and with oneself) in such so-
        cieties. (Kitching 2002,15–16)                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      200                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      MarcJames Deegan https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8382-7924
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
       1. Kitching2002,1–3;Pleasants2002,160–161;andVinten2013,10–11and22.Forarecent
         collectionofessaysthatbringoutaffinitiesbetweenWittgensteinandMarxseeSulpizioetal.
         2021. The essays demonstrate different ways to address Wittgenstein and Marx(ism) from
         multiple perspectives starting from the criticalattitude adoptedbyboththinkers.
       2. Theseideasaremirroredinsection89ofTheBigTypescriptTS213wherethecaseismadefor
         philosophy providing us with an U¨bersicht of language, a perspicuous representation of the
         grammaticallandscapewhichconsistsin‘seeingconnections’andwhichitselfis‘lackingin
         perspicuity’ (Wittgenstein 1993, 171–177). However, philosophy, Wittgenstein says at page
         177, cannot interfere with our actual use of language, only describe it. Nor can it erect a
         foundation.‘Itleaveseverythingasitis’includingmathematics.Philosophy‘putseverything
         beforeus’andthereisnothingtoexplainordeduce.Indeed,onhisanalysis,anythingthatdoes
         not ‘lieopento viewis of nointerestto us’.          
       3. Ourphilosophical,conceptual,investigationscannotuncovernewfactsabouttheworldbut,by
         removingourprejudicesanderroneousnotionsandclarifyingourthoughts,wewilltreatthe
         worldandourconceptsdifferently(Hacker1972,125).Inthisrespect,then,philosophyisnot
         leavingeverythingasitis.Inmathematics,wedistinguishbetweenourcalculationsandproofs
         andtheproseweusetodescribethem.Andwhenwecleansethisproseofconceptualconfusion,
         ourmethodsofproofmaynotchangebutourattitudetowardsthemwill(Glock1996,236).
         ‘The concept of calculation as an experiment tends to strike us as the only realistic one,’
         Wittgenstein remarks, while everything else, our other methods of inquiry, appear to us as
         ‘moonshine’(Wittgenstein1967a,II,§76).Acalculationisnotanexperiment,inotherwords.
         Here wearepointing to different waysin which weuse our words.
       4. In the Philosophical Grammar Wittgenstein says that philosophers cannot use words in a
         ‘sublimatedorabstractsense’andconstructasecond-orderaccountoflanguageandmeaning;
         we‘muststillspeakthelanguageofeveryday’nomatterhowcoarseandmaterialitmayappear
         (Wittgenstein 1974a, 1974b, 121). He also assures us that ‘we cannot achieve any greater
         generalityinphilosophythaninwhatwesayinlifeandinscience.Heretoo(asinmathematics)
         we leaveeverything as itis.’                        
       5. WittgensteinsharesFriedrichNietzsche’sconcernthatturningphilosophyintoasciencewould
         meanthrowinginthetowel(Nietzsche1979,§55).Weshouldceasebeingpreoccupiedwith
         the‘methodofscience’,Wittgensteinsays,andshouldnotna¨ıvely‘askandanswerquestionsin
         theway sciencedoes’ (Wittgenstein 1969,18).         
       6. MaxineGreenecontinuestoofferherinsightintoutilisingliterature,poetry,sculpture,dance
         andothercreativeandimaginativeworkstoenvisionnewvistas,of‘lookingatthingsasifthey
         could beotherwise’(see Greene 1995;Greene 2011;Greene 2017; andGreene 2018).
       7. SeeMedina 2013, Chapter6.                          
       8. Crary2000,118.ThemisinterpretationsareduetoreadingsofWittgensteinthatadvocateause-
         theoryofmeaningwhichprohibitsexternalcriticismofourformsoflife,thatpreventsusfrom
         bringingcriticalconceptstobearonourformsofsocialexistence,moralandpolitical—allof
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         201     
                                                             
                                                             
         whichCrarycastsintothenetof‘inviolabilityinterpretations’(Id.119–121).Sherightlypoints
         outthatwhenWittgensteinsaysthe‘meaningofawordisitsuseinthelanguage’heisquite
         specificthatthoughthisappliesina‘largeclassofcases’,usedoesnotdetermineorfixmeaning
         inallcases(Wittgenstein2001,§43).Crary’sdiscussionofthechampionsandcriticsofalleged
         Wittgenstein’sconservatismincludeJ.C.Ny´ıri,ErnestGellner,RichardRortyandStanleyFish
         (Id.121–130).                                       
       9. Wittgensteinisfarfromsuggestingthatweslavishlyadheretothestatusquo(Langille1992,
         237–238).Onthecontrary,wearealwaysabletoaskquestions,tochallengewhatcountsas
         legitimate.Wittgenstein‘isnotsayingthatwemustdutifullysubmitourselvestotheestablished
         order,’AndrewLuggsays,‘butonlythatwestartoutfrompracticesalreadyinplace’(Lugg
         1985,468).Wemusthaveastartingpointforcritique,wemusttakesomethingforgranted,but
         this does not mean, Lugg continues, that Wittgenstein is excluding the possibility of asking
         questions about justification.                      
      10. Pitkin makes the valid point that while Wittgenstein is not a political theorist and does not
         deviseaplanforsocialchange,ifwearetoaccepthischallenge,andmaketheself-knowledge
         heisofferingourown,thenwearesummoned‘backtoreality,toourselves,toaction,toour
         responsibilities’(Pitkin1972,339).KnowledgeforWittgenstein,shecontinues,demandsan
         ‘acknowledgementthatitisnotneutralwithrespecttoaction’and,hence,wearelefttodevise
         ourowncoursesofaction.ShesuggeststhataWittgensteinianapproachmeanswelistentothe
         viewsofotherpeople,othercultures,andseetheirperspectives.Pitkinaddsthatifweareto
         changeourinstitutions,wedothisinouractions,inourlivesandnotinisolation(Id.340).
      11. AndrewLuggmaintainsthatWittgenstein’ssilenceabouthowwecanchangeoursocialand
         culturalpracticesforthebetterdoesnotmakehimaconservativethinker.Similarly,healigns
         WittgensteinwithMarx’selevenththesisonFeuerbachcontendingthatwhatisrequiredbyboth
         thinkersis‘notmoreexplanation,butratherachangeinourpracticessothattheproblemsthey
         giverisetonolongeroccur’andthat‘theanswerswerequiremustbeforgedinpractice;they
         cannotbegeneratedbyphilosophersoutoftheirownmeagreexperience’(Lugg1985,472).
      12. Cressida Heyes, in her Introduction, discusses Wittgenstein’s attitude to politics and rightly
         emphasiseshisgreaterconcernfortheethicalintegrityoftheindividual(Heyes2003,1–3).She
         highlights conservative and relativist views commonly associated with Wittgenstein’s later
         thought(Id.3–6).Sheconcludes:‘IstillthinkWittgensteinwouldhavebeenhorrifiedbythe
         ideaofhisworkbeingincorporatedintopoliticalprojects.Toobadforhim:hisideashavelong
         sinceescapedhisgovernance(iftheywereeverinhisthrall);theyhavegrownup,movedout,
         andcreatedfamiliesoftheirown.Nonetheless,eveniftherearen’tmoreorlessauthenticways
         ofbeing aWittgensteinian,there are,Iwouldargue,betterandworseways.Ihopethatthe
         essayscollectedinthisbookexemplifythebetterways,andthusthattheywillindeedinspire
         the readerto thoughtsof their own.’ (Id.13)         
      13. Janik’s response to those sceptics who find Wittgenstein’s aphorism that philosophy leaves
         everythingasitistobea‘hopelesslyunacceptableendorsementofthestatusquo’istoremind
         themhowWittgenstein’sapproachonlyentailsthattheorisingfailsinits‘taskofunderstanding
         theworldwhenitalsodirectsitselftochangingit’(Janik2003,104).Wittgenstein,hesays,
         believes thatnoonehas ananswerto howwe changethe worldfor the better.Further,it is
         hardly surprising, Janik continues, that Wittgenstein’s remarks about rule-following and the
         roleofphilosophyand,inparticular,thatphilosophycanonlydescribepracticesandnotalter

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      202                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
         them,are‘construedaspoliticallyconservativeaswellascapriciouslyperverse’,butthisisto
         readtheminisolationfromWittgenstein’scentralpointthat‘toacquireaconceptistofollowa
         rule’ (Id.112).                                     
      14. Tully’sdiscussiondrawsattentiontoconventionsofpoliticalthoughtthatseektoestablishone
         or other form of critical reflection as foundational andhe critiques the justificational or val-
         idational form put forth by Jürgen Habermas and the interpretational or hermeneutical form
         presentedbyCharlesTaylor.Since‘anypracticeofcriticalreflectionisitselfalreadyfoundedin
         the popular sovereignty of our multiplicity of humdrum ways of acting with words’, Tully
         concludes,weshouldrejectanysingleformofcriticalreflectionasafoundation(Tully2003,
         41).Indeed,‘submissiontooneregimeofcriticalreflection,astheself-certifyingguarantorof
         our freedom, woulditself mark the endof our free andcritical life’(Ibid.).
      15. McManusdiscreditsthetestofmeaningfulnessasitisoftenexpressedinthesocialsciences.He
         showsshortfallsinPeterWinch’sapproachoratleastsuggeststhatWinchleaveshisworkon
         Wittgenstein ‘unfinished’ (McManus2003,64–66).McManusconcludesthat Wittgenstein’s
         philosophy‘canbeunderstoodasanefforttoshowwhywelosenothingwhenwerecognizethe
         incoherence of [a] confusedtestof meaningfulness’(Id.65–66).
      16. ‘Whatisyouraiminphilosophy?’,Wittgensteinwrites,‘Toshewtheflythewayoutofthefly-
         bottle’ (Wittgenstein 2001, §309). Wittgenstein is intent on teaching us the importance of
         thinking forourselves.                              
      17. CarverarguesthatWittgensteinwas‘veryinterestedinchangingtheworldforordinarypeople
         bystrippingawayagooddealofover-complexinterpretation,especiallyofthephilosophical
         (and pseudo-philosophical) kind’ (Carver 2002, 105). Wittgenstein and Marx unseated
         metaphysical foundations and appealed to facts about ordinary people and their daily
         activities–howtheyuselanguageandengageinsocialpractices.Carverconcludes:‘If“the
         people”aretobetrustedinrulingthemselves,thereisthenlittlewarrantforclaimingthatthey
         areonlylicensedtodothisinrelationtosome“philosophical”frameworkpropoundedbythe
         “voicefromnowhere”,–anauthorial–andauthority-presumptionthatMarxandWittgenstein
         seem (in thisreader’s/writer’seyes)to havewanted tosubvert’(Id.108).
      18. Wittgenstein’sphilosophyis,DeIacocontinues,‘focusedonthegoalofchangingthelookof
         philosophersbyconvertingtowardseverydaylanguageusedespitethemetaphysicalusesas
         well’ (De Iaco 2021, 26). She takes the view that Wittgenstein does not conceive of the
         possibilityofsocialtransformationthroughlanguage;andthataWittgensteinianchangeinthe
         waywelookatourphilosophicalproblemsdoesnothavepractical-socialconsequencesandfor
         thisreason‘thecorrectionofthelanguagethathemadecannotbecalledareform’(Id.27).
      19. ‘What we do,’ Wittgenstein writes, ‘is to bring words back from their metaphysical to their
         everyday use’ (Wittgenstein 2001, §116).            
      20. FerruccioRossi-LandiprovidesanearlycriticismofWittgenstein’sphilosophytotheextent
         thatitlacksatheoryofhistoryandsociety(Rossi-Landi2002).MarcoGiganteretortsthatthis
         lack could be explained away as a consequence of Rossi-Landi’s diagnosis as distinct from
         something Wittgenstein should havedealt with (Gigante 2021,48, footnote7).
      21. NancyFraserprovidesacritiqueofJürgenHabermas’socialtheoryinrelationtothestruggles
         andwishesofcontemporarywomen.Sheexamineswhatiscriticalandwhatisnotinhistheory.
         ‘HabermassaysvirtuallynothingaboutgenderinTheTheoryofCommunicativeAction’,she
         notes,andyetsheiswillingtoreadthatworkfromthe‘standpointofanabsence’,extrapolate

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         203     
                                                             
                                                             
         fromthingshedoessaytothingshedoesnotand‘reconstructhowvariousmattersofconcernto
         feminists would appear from his perspective had those matters been thematized’ (Fraser
         1989, 114).                                         
      22. Marx is in interested in advancing workers’ rights and clearly wants theorists to engage in
         transformativeactionashiselevenththesisonFeuerbachindicates(MarxandEngels2010,5).
         Wittgenstein wants to remove linguistic confusions that hamper traditional ways of philo-
         sophicalthinkingandtonurturecriticalmodesofinquirywhile,atthesametime,expressinga
         personal preference for framing conceptualandaesthetic questions (Wittgenstein 1980,79).
      23. ThelaterWittgensteinis,forinstance,opposedtoscientismandtoconstructingtheoriesbased
         onthescientificmodel.Hiscritiqueofempiricismandthehegemonyofsciencepervadesmuch
         of his work (Vinten 2013, 13–14). Human beings, Wittgenstein retorts, have to ‘awaken to
         wonder’, as do peoples, and science is a way of sending them back to sleep (Wittgenstein
         1980, 5).                                           
      24. VintenseesmeritinMarxistsreadingWittgenstein’swork‘tobetterunderstandthenatureof
         traditionalphilosophicalproblems’andto‘producebetterMarxist/emancipatoryphilosophy’
         (Vinten 2013, 11, footnote 6). Also, he concludes that ‘there is no particular reason why
         Wittgensteiniansshouldnotbecomeinvolvedinworkers’struggleswiththeaimofcreatinga
         classlesssociety’(Id.22)–or,asIwouldputit,workingtogethertocreateafreerandmore
         inclusive, democratic society.                      
      25. BothWittgensteinandMarxfollowuponLudwigFeuerbach’sinsightsbyunderscoringchange
         inpractice,aspect-seeing;andthatwhatneedsalteringisnotabelieforadoctrinebutanattitude
         andawayoflife(Read2002,260).Boththinkersadoptanunorthodoxviewofphilosophyby
         replacing philosophical argument with a therapeutic orientation that re-grounds ‘us in the
         concretionofouractuallivesandwith(actually,practically)layingtorestthemetaphysicsthat
         distorts those lives’ (Id. 271). Finally, Marx, like Wittgenstein, demands that we should not
         reifylanguagebutdescendtooureverydaylives,toourworldsasweordinarilyliveandspeak
         (Id.273).                                           
      26. HereReadisportrayingMarxat‘hisnon-scientificbest’,wantingtochangethingsnotthrough
         explanation but ‘through description interlinkedwith action’ (Read 2002,274).
      27. ‘Thereisnotaphilosophicalmethod’,Wittgensteinwrites,‘thoughthereareindeedmethods,
         like different therapies’ (Wittgenstein 2001,§133). 
      28. ‘In this way’, Gigante says, we can find in Wittgenstein and Marx’s ‘philosophical investi-
         gations the idea that the transformation of the individual’s existential conditions involves a
         philosophicalreflectiononlanguagetotheextentthatthelatterpermitsthemtorecognizethe
         processesof the ideological bewitchment of society’ (Gigante2021,50).
      29. Aphilosopherisnotacitizenofanycommunityofideas,butsomeonewhostandsoutside,
         indeeddistanceshimorherselffrom,thehumancommunitiesandwhocanseethemforwhat
         theyare(Kenny1984,55–56).FrankRamsayisthusa‘bourgeoisthinker’interestedonlyin
         ‘clearinguptheaffairsofsomeparticularcommunity’(Wittgenstein,1980,17),acceptingwhat
         hismathematicalpeersordainastruthorknowledge(Cf.Kenny1984,55–56;andMonk1991,
         246–247).AsMarcoBrusottiputsit,a‘genuinelyphilosophicalreflectionaimsatshowingthat
         thisstateisnottheonlypossibleone’;andthatabourgeoisthinkerdoesnotlookbeyondthe
         horizon of his or her own society (Brusotti 2021, 185 and 188). Wittgenstein wants us to
         maintainourcriticaldistanceandbeabletocritiqueoursystemsofknowledgeandtruthaswell

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      204                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
         asourowninternalframeworks,beliefs,valuesandbiases.Thetenetsofestablishedauthority
         are,inthissense,andtoborrowfromNietzsche,alwaysopentoquestion‘underthepoliceof
         mistrust’ (Nietzsche 2001,§344).                    
      30. Uschanovrightlycontendsthatphilosopherscanvoicetheirpoliticalviews,runforofficeand
         fight social evils but a philosophy of politics will not turn their political statements into
         philosophical ones(Uschanov 2002,39).               
      31. Wittgenstein 2001,§109.                            
      32. Wittgenstein, 2001, §144.                          
      33. Wittgenstein 1980,17.                              
      34. Wittgenstein 2001,§66.                             
      35. Pleasantsarguesthat:‘amorepromisingwayofdoingsocialcriticismwouldbetoprovoke
         peopleintoreflectingonwhattheydoandknowinthecourseoftheireverydaysociallife.This
         process might be stimulated by “reminding” them (and ourselves), through “perspicuous
         description”,ofsomeoftheconsequencesandimplicationsoftheir(our)actionsandhowthese
         relate to their (our) basic intuitive sense of decency and justice. This, I submit, will not be
         achievedthroughpromulgation ofpurportedly explanatory orrevelatory theory,butonlyby
         coaxingandcajolingpeopleintoseeingwhattheyactuallydo,orcontributetodoing,totheir
         fellowcreaturesandnaturalenvironment,andthenquestioningthemoraladequacyofthisway
         of life’(Pleasants 2002,167).                       
      36. Toresolvephilosophicalproblemsthenentailsresolvingtherealcausesintheworld(Go¨cmen
         andKilinc,2021,53).Inthissense,WittgensteinandMarxaresuggestingchangingtheworld.
         Thismay,Go¨cmenandKilinccontinue,‘alsobringaboutconclusivesolutionstoourlanguage
         andphilosophical problems’.                         
      37. Ray Monk arguesthat ‘political questions’ are, for Wittgenstein, ‘secondary to questions of
         personalintegrity’:beingtruetoone’sselfistheparamountduty(Monk1991,18).Thisiswhy,
         whenquestionedaboutimprovingtheworld,Wittgensteinretorts,‘Justimproveyourself;that
         is the only thing you can do to better the world’ (Id. 17–18 and 213). Monk writes: ‘Witt-
         genstein’sremarkaboutphilosophy–thatit“leaveseverythingasitis”–isoftenquoted.Butit
         is less often realised that, in seeking to change nothing but the way we look at things,
         Wittgensteinwasattemptingtochangeeverything.Hispessimismabouttheeffectivenessofhis
         work is related to his conviction that the way we look at things is determined, not by our
         philosophical beliefs, but byourculture, bytheway we arebrought up’ (Id.533).
      38. Linguistic analysis and social critical theory should not be considered as separate domains
         whereby politics belong only to the latter. And even though Wittgenstein’s conception of
         semanticsisnotdialecticalinTheodorAdorno’ssense,Soulezcontinues,itcanstillbereadas
         critical inasocial sense(Soulez2021,176).           
      39. Brusotti says that comparing an institution with alternative possibilities calls its alleged ne-
         cessityintoquestionandthat‘thinkingofalternativeactivities,ofremoteagesandcultures,is
         simplyatoolthatenables“contemplation”tofindoutthenatureofafamiliarinstitution,e.g.to
         understand“what sortof thing,what sortof activity scienceis”’ (Brusotti 2021,187).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         205     
                                                             
                                                             
      References                                             
      Brusotti,Marco.2021.“FortheMarxistsareracingmotorists.”WittgensteinonMaxEastmanand
         on“thesoundideainMarx’sthinking”.”InWittgensteinandMarx.MarxandWittgenstein
         (181-195),editedbyFabioA.Sulpizio,MoiraDeIaco,andGabrieleSchimmenti,Berlin:Peter
         LangGmbH.                                           
      Carver, Terrell. 2002. “Marx, Wittgenstein and postmodernism.” In Marx and Wittgenstein:
         Knowledge, morality and politics (95-110), edited by Gavin Kitching, and Nigel Pleasants,
         Abingdon:Routledge.                                 
      Crary, Alice. 2000. “Wittgenstein’s philosophy in relation to political thought. In The New Witt-
         genstein (118-145),edited byAliceCrary,andRupert Read,London:Routledge.
      DeIaco,Moira.2021.“Marx,Wittgenstein,andtheReformofLanguage.AComplementaryView
         ofWittgensteinandMarx’sThoughts.”InWittgensteinandMarx.MarxandWittgenstein(19-
         29),editedbyFabioA.Sulpizio,MoiraDeIaco,andGabrieleSchimmenti,Berlin:PeterLang
         GmbH.                                               
      Edwards, Georgina. 2019. “Language Games in the Ivory Tower: Comparing the Philosophical
         InvestigationswithHermanHesse’sTheGlassBead.”JournalofPhilosophyofEducation53
         (4): 669–687.DOI: 10.1111/1467-9752.12389.          
      Eldridge, Richard. 2003. “Wittgenstein and the Conversation of Justice.” In The Grammar of
         Politics:WittgensteinandPoliticalPhilosophy(117-128),editedbyCressidaJ.Heyes,Ithaca:
         Cornell University Press.                           
      Fann, K. T. 2002. “Beyond Marx and Wittgenstein. (A confession of a Wittgensteinian Marxist
         turnedTaoist).”InMarxandWittgenstein:Knowledge,moralityandpolitics(282-294),edited
         byGavinKitching, andNigelPleasants. Abingdon: Routledge.
      Fraser, Nancy. 1989. Unruly Practices: Power, Discourse and Gender in Contemporary Social
         Theory.Minneapolis: University of MinnesotaPress.   
      Gakis, Dimitris. 2021. “Wittgenstein, Marx, and (post-) Marxism: A Synoptic Overview.” In
         WittgensteinandMarx.MarxandWittgenstein(7-17),editedbyFabioA.Sulpizio,MoiraDe
         Iaco, andGabrieleSchimmenti. Berlin:Peter LangGmbH. 
      Gigante, Marco. 2021. “Language, Alienation, and Philosophical Therapy in Marx and Witt-
         genstein.” In Wittgenstein and Marx. Marx and Wittgenstein (41-51), edited by Fabio A.
         Sulpizio,Moira De Iaco,andGabriele Schimmenti, Berlin: PeterLang GmbH.
      Glock, Hans-Johann.1996. AWittgenstein Dictionary.Oxford: BlackwellPublishers Ltd.
      Go¨cmen, Dog˘an, and Kilinc, Dog˘an Baris. 2021. “Being and Consciousness in Karl Marx and
         LudwigWittgenstein.”InWittgensteinandMarx.MarxandWittgenstein(53-65),editedby
         FabioA.Sulpizio,Moira De Iaco,andGabriele Schimmenti, Berlin: Peter LangGmbH.
      Greene, Maxine. 1995. Releasing the Imagination: Essays on Education, the Arts, and Social
         Change.SanFrancisco: Jossey-Bass.                   
      Greene,Maxine.2011.“ReleasingtheImagination.”NJDramaAustraliaJournal34(1):61–70.
         DOI: 10.1080/14452294.2011.11649524.                
      Greene,Maxine.2017.“TeachingasPossibility:ALightinDarkTimes.”InTheCriticalPedagogy
         Reader,editedbyAntoniaDarder,RodolfoD.Torres,andMartaP.Baltodano,ThirdEdition,
         494–502. Abingdon:Routledge.                        
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      206                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(2)
                                                             
                                                             
      Greene,Maxine.2018.LandscapesofLearning.2018SpecialEdition.NewYork:TeachersCollege
         Press.                                              
      Hacker, P. M. S. 1972. Insight and Illusion: Wittgenstein on Philosophy andthe Metaphysics of
         Experience.Oxford: Clarendon Press.                 
      Heyes,CressidaJ.2003.“Introduction.”InTheGrammarofPolitics:Wittgenstein andPolitical
         Philosophy(1-13),edited byCressida J.Heyes,Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
      Janik,Allan.2003.“NotesontheNaturalHistoryofPolitics.”InTheGrammarofPolitics:Wittgenstein
         andPoliticalPhilosophy(99-116),editedbyCressidaJ.Heyes,Ithaca:CornellUniversityPress.
      Kenny,Anthony.1984. TheLegacyof Wittgenstein.Oxford:Basil Blackwell Publisher Ltd.
      Kitching,Gavin.2002.“Introduction.”InMarxandWittgenstein:Knowledge,moralityandpolitics
         (1-19),edited byGavin Kitching,andNigel Pleasants,Abingdon: Routledge.
      Langille,Brian.1992.“PoliticalWorld.”InWittgensteinandLegalTheory,editedbyDennisM.
         Patterson, 233–247.Boulder: Westview Press,Inc.     
      Lugg, Andrew. 1985. “Was Wittgenstein a Conservative Thinker?” The Southern Journal of
         Philosophy23, 4:465–474. DOI: 10.1111/j.2041-6962.1985.tb00416.x.
      Marx,Karl,andEngels,Frederick.2010.“MarxandEngels1845-47,Vol.Volume5.ElectricBook:
         Lawrence andWishart.”http://hekmatist.com.          
      McManus,Denis.2003.“Wittgenstein,Fetishism,andNonsenseinPractice.”InTheGrammarofPolitics:
         WittgensteinandPoliticalPhilosophy(63-81),editedbyCressidaJ.Heyes,Ithaca:CornellUniversityPress.
      Medina,Jose´.2013.TheEpistemologyofResistance:GenderandRacialOppression,Epistemic
         Injustice, andResistant Imaginations. Oxford:Oxford University Press.
      Monk,Ray.1991.Ludwig Wittgenstein: TheDuty ofGenius.London: Vintage.
      Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1979. Philosophy and Truth: Selections from Nietzsche’s Notebooks of the
         early 1870’s.London: Humanities PressInternational, Inc.
      Nietzsche,Friedrich.2001.TheGayScience.TranslatedbyJosefineNauckhoff,EditedbyBernard
         Williams, Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.     
      Pitkin,FenichelHanna.1972.WittgensteinandJustice:OntheSignificanceofLudwigWittgenstein
         forSocial andPolitical Thought.Berkeley: University of California Press.
      Pleasants,Nigel.2002.TowardsacriticaluseofMarxandWittgenstein.”InMarxandWittgenstein:
         Knowledge,moralityandpolitics(160-181),editedbyGavinKitching,andNigelPleasants,
         Abingdon:Routledge.                                 
      Read,Rupert.2002.“MarxandWittgensteinonvampiresandparasites:Acritiqueofcapitaland
         metaphysics.”InMarxandWittgenstein:Knowledge,moralityandpolitics(254-281),edited
         byGavinKitching, andNigelPleasants. Abingdon:Routledge.
      Rossi-Landi,Ferruccio.2002.“TowardaMarxianuseofWittgenstein.”InMarxandWittgenstein:
         Knowledge,moralityandpolitics(185-212),editedbyGavinKitching,andNigelPleasants.
         Abingdon:Routledge.                                 
      Schumann,Claudia.2017.“WittgensteinandPhilosophyofEducation:AFeministRe-assessment.”
         InACompaniontoWittgensteinonEducation:PedagogicalInvestigations(379-388),edited
         byMichael A.Peters,andJeffStickney,Singapore: Springer.
      Skilbeck, Adrian. 2017. “Wittgenstein, Cavell and the Register of Philosophy: Discerning Seri-
         ousnessandTriviality inDramaTeaching.”InACompaniontoWittgenstein onEducation:
         Pedagogical Investigations (193-207), edited by Michael A. Peters, and Jeff Stickney, Sin-
         gapore:Springer.                                    

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Deegan                                         207     
                                                             
                                                             
      Smeyers, Paul. 2017. “This Is Simply What I Do.” on the Relevance of Wittgenstein’s Alleged
         Conservatism and the Debate About Cavell’s Legacy for Children and Grown Ups.” In A
         Companion to Wittgenstein on Education: Pedagogical Investigations (241-259), edited by
         Michael A.Peters,andJeffStickney, eds Singapore:Springer.
      Soulez,Antonia.2021.“PoliticalDimensionsofWittgenstein’s“Praxis”asLinguisticActivity.”In
         WittgensteinandMarx.MarxandWittgenstein(167-179),editedbyFabioA.Sulpizio,Moira
         DeIaco, andGabriele Schimmenti, Berlin: PeterLang GmbH.
      Standish, Paul. 2017. “This Is Simply What I Do Too: A Response to Paul Smeyers.” In A
         Companion to Wittgenstein on Education: Pedagogical Investigations (261-274), edited by
         Michael A.Peters,andJeffStickney, Singapore:Springer.
      Stickney,Jeff.2020.“Wittgenstein’sRelevancetoPhilosophyofEducation:personalreflectionson
         meaningfulusesofpost-foundationalism.”EducaçãoandRealidade45(3):1–19.DOI:10.
         1590/2175-6236106759.                               
      Sulpizio,FabioA,Iaco,MoiraDe,andSchimmenti,Gabriele.2021.WittgensteinandMarx.Marx
         andWittgenstein.Berlin: Peter LangGmbH.             
      Tully, James. 2003. “Wittgenstein and Political Philosophy: Understanding Practices of Critical
         Reflection.”InTheGrammarofPolitics:WittgensteinandPoliticalPhilosophy(17-42),edited
         byCressida J.Heyes,Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
      Uschanov,T.P.2002.ErnestGellner’scriticismsofWittgensteinandordinarylanguagephilosophy.
         In Marx and Wittgenstein: Knowledge, morality and politics (23-46), edited by Gavin
         Kitching, andNigelPleasants, Abingdon:Routledge.    
      Vinten, Robert. 2013. “Leave Everything as it is—A Critique of Marxist Interpretations of
         Wittgenstein.”Critique 41(1): 9–22.DOI: 10.1080/03017605.2013.776233.
      Waismann,Friedrich.1979.WittgensteinandtheViennaCircle.TranslatedbyJoachimSchulteand
         BrianF.McGuinness, EditedbyBrian F. McGuinness, Oxford:Basil Blackwell.
      Wittgenstein,Ludwig.1967a.RemarksontheFoundationsofMathematics.Translated byG.E.
         M.Anscombe,EditedbyG.H.vonWright,R.RheesandG.E.M.Anscombe,SecondEdition.
         Oxford:Basil Blackwell.                             
      Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1967b. Zettel.Translated by G. E. M. Anscombe, Edited by G. E.
         M.Anscombe andG.H.vonWright, Berkley: University of California Press.
      Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1969. The Blue and Brown Books: Preliminary Studies for the “Philo-
         sophical Investigations”.Second Edition.Oxford: BlackwellPublishing Ltd.
      Wittgenstein,Ludwig.1974a.TractatusLogico-Philosophicus.Translatedby.D.F.PearsandB.F.
         McGuinness., Abingdon:Routledge.                    
      Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1974b. Philosophical Grammar. Edited by Rush Rees. Translated by An-
         thony Kenny.Oxford: BasilBlackwell.                 
      Wittgenstein,Ludwig.1980.CultureandValue.TranslatedbyPeterWinch,EditedbyG.H.von
         Wright, Chicago: TheUniversity of Chicago Press.    
      Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1993. The ‘Big Typescript’ (TS 213, §§86-93).” In Ludwig Wittgenstein.
         Philosophical Occasions 1912-1951 (161-199), edited by James C. Klagge, and Alfred
         Nordmann,Indianapolis: HackettPublishing Company,Inc.
      Wittgenstein,Ludwig.2001.PhilosophicalInvestigations.TranslatedbyG.E.M.Anscombe.Third
         Edition.Oxford: Blackwell PublishingLtd.            
                                                             