[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2025,Vol.51(9)1548–1567
      Towards   a decolonial political                       
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2024   
      theory: Thinking  from the zone                        
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      of nonbeing                        sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537241229055
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Charles des Portes                                    
      UniversityofLeeds,UK                                   
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      Thisarticle offerstooutlineadirection foradecolonialpoliticaltheory basedonAime´
      Ce´saire’s and Frantz Fanon’s thoughts. In doing so, I will first discuss some work of
      comparative political theory that could be associated with an attempt to decolonize
      political theory. Rather than a systematic critique of these works, this article aims to
      outlinesomeoftheirlimitsfromadecolonialperspective,suchastheirembedmentina
      continentalontology/logic,andtheirover-emphasisonmethodologythatcanleadtoan
      instrumental account of politics. In contrast, I will argue for a decolonial existential
      political theory that grounds its investigation in what Frantz Fanon called ‘the zone of
      nonbeing’andthattakespoliticsasfirstphilosophy.Tomakemypoint,IwilldiscussAime´
      Ce´saire’s Letter to Maurice Thorez and Frantz Fanon’s Political Theory of the Damne´s.
                                                             
      Keywords                                               
      decolonialthought,phenomenology,existentialphilosophy,politicaltheory,comparative
      political theory                                       
                                                             
                                                             
      In 2015, Charles Mills published an article proposing to decolonize Western political
      philosophy.ThisimportanttextfocusedontheAnglophoneanalytictraditionofpolitical
      philosophy and one of its most prominent proponents, John Rawls. In his essay, Mills
      criticized the analytic philosophers’ turning away from issues such as imperialism and
      colonialism,whichwereimportantthemesofthecontinentaltradition,withauthorssuch
      as Jean-Paul Sartre and Hannah Arendt. Moreover, Mills proposed to acknowledge the
      racial dimensions of the canon and to unsettle the coloniality1 of Rawls’ normative
      assumptions.Inotherwords,hisworkwasaboutcritiquingtheEurocentrismof(analytic)
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      CharlesdesPortes,SchoolofPoliticsandInternationalStudies,UniversityofLeeds,LeedsLS29JT,UK.
      Email:C.desPortes@leeds.ac.uk                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1549     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      political philosophy. Attention to the coloniality of Euromodern political theory and
      Western political concepts and categories is not new and has been pursued by several
      scholars since Anibal Quijano’s canonical article on the coloniality of power (Quijano
      1992; Quijano and Ennis 2000). Following from this, decolonial thinkers have coined
      conceptsandtheoriessuchasthecolonialityofbeing,thecolonialityofhumanrights,and
      thecolonialityofgender(Lugones2016;Maldonado-Torres2007,2017).Inotherwords,
      the point is to unsettle the underside or dark side of Modernity (Dussel and Mendieta
      1998; Mignolo 2011). Yet, some theorists like David Meyer Temin argue that decolo-
      nizing a discipline such as political theory must go beyond undoing Eurocentrism. For
      him,‘thedecolonizationofpolitical,social,andculturaltheoryhaslargelyproceededas
      an enterprise directed at a critique of the parochial viewpoints of Western political
      theorizing’(Temin2023,236).Inotherwords,forTemin,decolonialtheory,inpractice,
      often represents only an epistemological critique of the Eurocentric universalism of
      political concepts. Using the example of developmentalism and the work of Walter
      Rodney,Teminthusarguesthattheprojectof‘decolonizing’shouldconsistofaneffort‘to
      rework developmental categories in service of worldly projects of decolonization in
      practice’ (2023, 236). From Charles Mills and Walter Mignolo to David Meyer Temin,
      then,thedisputeisaboutthemeaningof‘decolonizing’.Accordingly,andasIwilldiscuss
      in this article, those disputes address metatheoretical matters as they delve into the
      question of the formulation of a theory by interrogating its foundations.
        More generally, it could be argued that these attempts to decolonize political theory
      havebeencarriedoutwithinanewformofpoliticaltheorycalledcomparativepolitical
      theory(CPT).Indeed,CPThasbeendevelopedforseveraldecadeswiththepromise‘to
      correctpoliticaltheory’sparochialism’(Ilieva2022,698).Thisisanattempttodiversify,
      expand and pluralize political theory by using a comparative method. According to
      Evgenia Ilieva, CPT pursues two agendas. The first one seeks ‘to transform the disci-
      plinary mainstream of political theory into a less geo-culturally exclusive landscape’,
      willing‘toexplodetheboundariesandpracticeofpoliticaltheory’.Thesecondonedoes
      not aim ‘to transform political theory per se but merely to create a space for encounter
      withinwhichothertraditionscanbemeaningfullyengaged’(Ilieva2022,700).Thesetwo
      agendas are thus metatheoretical and epistemological. They respectively aim to change
      the landscape of knowledge (production) by expanding it, and in the same move, to
      provincializeEuropeandNorthAmerica,andcreatethepossibilityofaWest/Non-West
      dialogue without reproducing epistemic colonialism. These agendas can take different
      formssuchasthecritiqueofEurocentrismalongthelinesofEdwardSaid’sOrientalism
      (2003).ItcanalsotaketheformofrevisitingaconceptfromaGlobalSouthperspective
      such as Temin’s account of development from the perspective of Walter Rodney that I
      mentioned above. Or it can be illustrated by the attempt to go beyond the critique of
      Eurocentrismbybuildingapracticalpoliticaltheoryofdecolonizationbasedontheanti-
      colonial politics of Fanon and Gandhi (Getachew 2019; Getachewand Mantena 2021),
      creating a South-South dialogue. However, some scholars such as Sanjay Seth (2020)
      argues that political theory is inherently Western and the very fact of deparochializing
      politicaltheorytendstoimposeaWesternviewonnon-Westernthinkerswhichresultsina
      distortion of the understanding of non-Western traditions and thoughts. From the

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1550                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      perspectiveofthecreolizationofpoliticaltheory,JaneGordonarguesthat‘comparative
      political theory still needs geopolitical-spatial designators of the “near” and the “far”’
      (J.A. Gordon 2014, 210) even if it can seek to overpass it by creating a dialogue.
      Therefore,theneedtocreatean‘inter-civilizationaldialogue’(Bowden2008;Dallmayr
      andManoochehri2007;J.A.Gordon2014)paradoxicallyrigidifiesthecategoriesitseeks
      toovercome.Followinginthefootstepsoftheseworks,thisarticlewillofferacritiqueof
      someworkfromcomparativepoliticaltheoristsandproposeanalternativedirectionfora
      decolonial political theory. To be clear, this is not a rejection of CPT per se but an
      emphasis on what I consider to be some of its limits from a decolonial perspective.
        To elucidate this, I will first look at Fred Dallmayr’s and Farah Godrej’s work to
      highlightsomeofthoselimitations.Mymainpointwillbethatthereisatransformationof
      political-social problems (colonial geography) into methodological problems. Conse-
      quently,Iwillarguethattheyofferamethodologicalsolutiontoacolonial-political-social
      problem. In other words, those works are embedded in what Nelson Maldonado-Torres
      calledacontinentalontology/logic(Maldonado-Torres2006).Incontrast,thisarticlewill
      suggest an alternative direction topolitical theory. Todevelop this new direction, I will
      lookatAime´ Ce´saire’sLettertoMauriceThorez(1956)andargueforapoliticaltheory
      thattakespoliticsratherthanepistemologyasfirstphilosophy.Ultimately,thearticlewill
      lookatwhatIcallFrantzFanon’spoliticaltheoryofthedamne´sandargueforadecolonial
      political theory that entertains a phenomenal relationship to reality. In other words, the
      article will outline an existential decolonial political theory based on Frantz Fanon and
      Aime´ Ce´saire.                                        
      Comparison as method                                   
      Comparative Political Theory was created as a way to deparochialize and criticize Po-
      litical Theory’s Eurocentrism. However, this field is broad and heterogeneous. Indeed,
      somecompetinginterpretationsexistaswellasinternalcritiques.Theproblemsraisedby
      comparative political theorists can be as diverse as how to translate a concept into a
      context and vice versa, how to create a dialogue between different conceptual geneal-
      ogies,etc.Basically,howtodealwiththeWest/non-Westcomparison,inordertoextend
      or transform political theory’s geo-cultural landscape, as Ilieva’s characterization of
      CPT’sagendatestifies.Thepurposeofthisarticleisnottoprovideasystematiccritiqueof
      CPTbutrathertoseeifitsmostbasicparadigm,namelyacomparisonthattakestheform
      ofdialogue,canbeseenasusefulforadecolonialpoliticaltheory.Indoingso,Iwillfocus
      on two main authors of that field, Fred Dallmayr who participated to its creation and
      problematization,aswellasFarahGodrejwhopushedfurthertheproblematizationoftwo
      binariesconstitutivetoCPT,namelySelf/OtherandWest/non-West.Iwillarguethatthose
      authorsmainlysuggestmethodologicallysolvingtheproblemofWest/non-Westdialogue
      and division without digging into its political foundations and implications. Indeed, as
      AndrewMarchargues,‘comparisonmustbe,inthefirstplace,amethod’(March2009,
      537).Accordingly,thissectionwillfollowthehypothesisthatCPTtransformsapolitical
      problem (West/non-West divide) into a methodological problem by the very move of
      willingnesstosolvethisproblemmethodologically.Iwillultimatelyarguethatitleadsto
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1551     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      (1) a displacement of politics that is now considered as a means-end and (2) a dis-
      placement of the initial problem that concerns decolonial theorists, namely, the racial/
      colonialdivisionoftheworld,hencetheWest/non-Westdivide.Toelucidatethis,Iwill
      showthattheproblemoflocationcanbeexplainedbywhatIthinktobeCPTcontinental
      logic/ontology.Thereafter,Iwilllookathowthisproblemisdealtwithmethodologically,
      which leads to an instrumental conception of politics. 
        Asitshouldbeclearbynow,thespecificityofCPTistheimportanceofexpandingthe
      theoreticaldialoguebeyondtheEurocentricWesternmonologue.AndbecauseCPT,asa
      project,isconstitutedbythisobjective,itisdependentonaspecificcartography,onethat
      dividestheWestandtherestinaWest/non-WestorGlobalNorth/GlobalSouthaxis.Let
      mefirstexemplifythisstatementbylookingatFredDallmayr’swork.Hispropositionofa
      comparativepoliticaltheoryemerged‘incontrasttohegemonicandimperialistmodesof
      theorizing’, to suggest a dialogical and hermeneutic theory which relies ‘on mutual
      interpretation’ (Dallmayr 2004, 249). Dallmayr found the philosophical inspiration for
      this opening of the West towards the rest in Continental Philosophy, and mainly in the
      work of Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg Gadamer. Indeed, following those authors,
      Dallmayr takes hermeneutics as ‘an understanding through an intensive dialogue, or
      encounter […] between self and other’ (2004, 250–1). Another source of inspiration is
      found in Charles Taylor’s multiculturalism which highlights ‘dialogical encounter and
      recognition’(Dallmayr2004,252).Theaimofthisrelationalontologyistomovetowards
      a universalism that takes into account cultural differences and takes the question of
      ‘otherness’ seriously. In other words, this Self-Other ontology that guides Dallmayr’s
      workaswellasothertheoristsassumesalogicofrecognitionofdifferencesthatwillshape
      thedialogicalrelationbetweentheSelfandtheOther.FromDallmayr’sperspective,CPT
      is conceived as a dialogical practice that is marked by cross- and inter-cultural under-
      standings(2004,249).However,asonecanimagine,thisdialogicallogicisnotbetween
      twodifferentWesternthinkersorcultures,atleastnotinCPT.Indeed,whilethemethod
      couldbeappliedtoit,thepointisnottocreateacross-culturaldialoguebetweenAnglo-
      American and French Continental philosophy. In Dallmayr’s word, we must take the
      world,inits‘ongoingprocessofglobalization’,asa‘globalvillage’(2004,249).While,
      within the frame of CPT, this approach is valuable to deparochialize political theory as
      well as to displace its Eurocentrism, from a decolonial perspective, I believe that this
      approachisproblematicbecauseitremainsembeddedinacontinentallogic,meaningthat
      it reifies the West/non-West as an almost natural cartography, where we just need to
      acknowledge and mutually learn from our differences.   
        Let me start by saying that this cartography has a history; it is not a pure data or a
      natural law that transcends history. Indeed, the West/non-West map is inherited from
      colonialconquestscharacterizedbytheexploitationandappropriationoflands,resources,
      andpeople.Priortothat,othergeographiesororganizationsoflocationsthatdidnotput
      Europeatitscenter,oreveninthenorth existed (L.R. Gordon2011;Sonneborn2006).
      Fromthatperspective,geographyisnotonlyaboutlatitudeandlongitudebutalsoabout
      the political organization of the world and the relationship between different locations
      (Rose-Redwoodetal.2020).Forinstance,theWestisalsoapoliticalcategory.AsWalter
      Mignoloargues,‘cartographyappropriatedspaceinthenameofgeography’(2011,185).

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1552                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      On the other hand, by looking at the work of the 16th-century geographer Abraham
      Ortelius, Monica Matei-Chesnoiu argues that geography is a practice that ‘orders and
      represents physical, social, and imaginative worlds’ (2012, 13). From that perspective,
      Matei-Chesnoiu follows, geography and cartographies are instruments that rationalize
      our understanding of the world (2012). Accordingly, the comparison in CPT can be
      considered as a shifting of the geographical framing of comparison, and not a shift in
      cartography. Or to put it differently, it is not a shifting of what Lewis Gordon calls the
      geographyofreason(L.R.Gordon2011).Indeed,byrationalizingourunderstandingof
      the world, ‘location’ is understood from a certain geographical perspective as a disci-
      plinarytruththatnarratestheWest/non-Westdivideasanaturalgeographicaldivideand
      hidesitspoliticaldimension.Therefore,itallowsitsreification.Indeed,cartographyisnot
      justaneutralzero-pointofobservation‘fromwhichtheworldcanbenamed’,butitwas
      ‘tied to a strategy of military and ideological control over other populations’ (Castro-
      Gómez 2021, 199).                                      
        The shift in location is operated within what Maldonado-Torres called a continental
      ontology or logic (2006, 2011). Here, I understand ‘continental ontology’ both as a
      specific philosophical traditionandas aspecificmappingoftheworld.Moreover, Iput
      that both are related to each other. Indeed, for instance, Dallmayr extensively refers to
      Gadamer,whoisamajornameofcontinentalphilosophy,fortwomainreasons.First,for
      his hermeneutic approach, and second to mention his observation of the world as a
      ‘worldwide network of communications’, understood as a ‘unity in diversity’, after the
      independence of formerly colonized countries (Dallmayr 2009, 32–3). In that sense,
      GadamerexemplifieswhatMaldonado-Torresunderstandbycontinentallogic,asbotha
      philosophical tradition and a colonial cartography. The problem with the continental
      ontology is that it tends to take continents (Europe, Asia, Africa, etc.) as natural geo-
      graphicalcoordinatesinwhichpeoplehappentolive.Indeed,thereareWesternthinkers
      and non-Western thinkers. However, what is forgotten here, is that the West/non-West
      locations are political. For instance, as Nelson Maldonado-Torres reminds us, ‘African
      unitywasfor[Fanon]strictlyapoliticalprojectdrivenbyinterestsindecolonization,not
      an ontological reality’ (2006, 3). Therefore, a continental ontology creates a symmetry
      betweenlocationsastheybotharedifferentfromeachother.Inthatsense,itisa‘unityin
      diversity’ as Dallmayr said (2009, 33), following Gadamer.
        Fromthatperspective,ageographicsymmetrydisplacesapoliticalasymmetry.Andit
      ispreciselywhatgeographicalrationalizationisabout,makingitseemsasiftheWestand
      non-Westarepurelynaturalgeographicallocations.Thesymmetrymakesitseemthat
      thenon-WestwasanOtherthatistobeunderstoodtocreateadialoguewithitsOther
      whichistheWest.Inthatsense,‘Self’and‘Other’areinterchangeablepositions.Here
      wefindDallmayr’sreferencetoTaylor’srecognitionofdifferences.However,asIsaid
      earlier, thisgeographical distinction is the result ofcolonialism and is still a sign ofa
      (neo)colonialpartitionoftheworld.Moreover,ifone follows Enrique Dussel(1995),
      colonialism is less a pure antagonism between colonized and colonizers (Self-Other)
      than a totalization, understood as an eclipse of the Other, of Alterity, within one
      paradigm. Indeed, colonized people do not exist without colonizers, and conversely.
      Therefore, the non-West is not to be understood as the Other of the West, but as its

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1553     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      ‘constitutive sub-other’ (Maldonado-Torres 2006, 4). To put it differently, the West is
      constitutiveofthenon-Westasmuchasthelatterisconstitutiveoftheformer.Yet,thisco-
      constitutionisnotsymmetricalbutarelationshipofexploitation-ofresources,lands,and
      people. As Lewis Gordon put it, ‘the black is […] indigenous to a world that rejects
      blacks’(2023,132).Thatsaid,Iwanttoillustratehowthisproblemoflocationissolved,
      or intended to get solved, by focussing on the work of Farah Godrej who relies on
      Dallmayr.Myargumentisthatbecauseofthiscontinentallogicthatdisplacesacolonial
      political geography to a cartography of natural spaces, the dialogical problem of the
      recognitionofdifferences,orbasicallythequestionofhowtocreateaunityindiversityis
      solved by the means of method. Accordingly, I believe that this does not address the
      problem of the colonial geography but reifies it.      
        It has already been highlighted by some scholars such as Roxanne Euben that
      comparative political theory ‘has been accompanied by a disproportionate focus on
      methodology’ (2022, 3). Indeed, when we look at recent and less recent academic
      productions, there is a heavy focus on how to do comparative political theory, or
      consideringtheancientGreeketymologyofmethod,methodos(μέθoδoς),literallywhat
      waytofollowtopursueresearchinCPT.Someargueforahermeneuticcircletocreatea
      West/non-West dialogue (Godrej 2011; Ilieva 2015, 2022), others for a critical and re-
      constructive paradigm (Getachew and Mantena 2021), and some for a contextualized
      approach (Little 2018), amongst other methods. Indeed, Ilieva explains the sometimes-
      conflicting approaches within CPTas a commitment to find ‘more adequate methods’
      (2022,699),regardingthedifferentchallengesposedbyCPT.RoxanneEubencalledthis
      overemphasis a ‘methodological machine’ that aims to make political theory ‘more
      hospitabletoquantification’(2022,4)and,mostimportantly,closertotheothersubfields2
      of political science that we find in North American universities. Following Lewis
      Gordon’swork,thiswaytoflattenpoliticaltheorysoitcanfitbetterinpoliticalscience,in
      general,couldbeassociatedwithanontologizationofthediscipline.Andthisisprecisely
      the point of what Gordon called disciplinary decadence which is ‘the ontologizing or
      reificationofadiscipline’(2006,4),asthesearchforadisciplinarypurity.Inotherwords,
      by overly focussing on method, the expansion of political theory into comparative
      political theory would paradoxically be a way to rigidify the discipline itself. Here, my
      purposeistotakeseriouslyandextendEuben’sthesisonthe‘methodologicalmachine’by
      saying that this overemphasis on method tends to put epistemology as first philosophy.
        The problem is not to look at method as such but to put epistemology as the first
      philosophy.Fromthatperspective,thenon-WesternthoughtsthatCPTaimstodiscover,
      explain,andaddtoknowledge,becometheproblemofinquiry.DuBoisarguedthatblack
      people were not only a problem to theorize or to know about, but also people having
      problems. Following the same idea, the dialogical logic of recognition, non-Western
      thinkers are not viewed as thinkers facing problems, but as a problem to solve. For
      Lewis Gordon, ‘they [non-Western thinkers here] become extraneous to its [the system]
      functioninspiteofhavingalreadybeengeneratedbysuchfunctions’(2011,97).Toputit
      differently,politicaltheorygeneratesnon-Westernthinkersandthoughtsasextraneous,so
      the problem of contemporary political theory is how to deal with this externality or ex-
      teriority.Inotherwords,thefirstproblemismethodological:‘Howtodealwithdifference?’.

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1554                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
        Toillustratethatpoint,letmefocusontwoimportantmethodologicalpointsmadeby
      Farah Godrej in her book Cosmopolitan Political Thought (2011). The work of Farah
      Godrej is interesting in that it actively problematizes the ‘West/non-West’ and ‘Self/
      Other’ binaries by bringing a cosmopolitan approach to comparative political theory.
      Following Fred Dallmayr, she suggests a hermeneutic approach to Otherness that is, I
      believe,bestillustratedbyherideasof‘self-dislocation’and‘self-relocation’.According
      to her, the former is a ‘metaphorical dislocation of the self from the comforts of dis-
      ciplinary home and training, from settled practices of intellectual production, and from
      settled vantage points about such production’. In other words, it is a reflection of one’s
      own practice ‘from within the very civilizations that confront us with their otherness’
      (Godrej 2011, 38–9). On the other hand, the self-relocation ‘allows one to resituate
      oneselfwithinfamiliardebateswithareconstitutedvisionthatbringsnewmethodological
      andsubstantiveinsightstobearonthem’(Godrej2011,75).Toputitdifferently,itisa
      waytobringanewvisiontoone’sdisciplinaryhome.Thismethodologywasofferedby
      Godrej to answer a possible problem of mistranslation and misinterpretation in com-
      parativepoliticaltheory(2011,51).Therefore,thisdialecticbetweenself-dislocationand
      relocationisaresponsetotheproblemof‘howtodealwiththeexternalityofnon-Western
      thought’ that I mentioned above.                       
        Thisentailsthequestion:canmethodsolveapoliticalproblem?Fromthatperspective,
      CPTbearstherisktobecomeadisciplinethatismainlyconcernedwithmethodsandthe
      assessment of those methods. By focussing on methodology, the inquiry focuses on a
      potentialspecificrelationshiptoreality.However,thisoveremphasisonmethodbearsthe
      paradoxicalrisktoleavereality,understoodasexistence,aside.ThisiswhyFanon(2015,
      5)urgedustoleavemethodsbehindtofocusonthelivedexperience,butIwilldiscuss
      that later. Indeed, method posits a law, a norm, to respect because ‘it is governed by
      repeatability,asafunctionofexperimentationandprediction’(L.R.Gordon2006,44–5).
      Alawpredictswhatitwillrealize;therefore,itneedsasetofnorms,ifnotontologies,that
      are true every time. For example, creating the best way to conduct a West/non-West
      dialogue postulates a homogeneity of the West/non-West, that does not consider non-
      WesternelementsintheWestandconversely,especiallyifonetakesthecaseofinternal
      colonialism.3 To be clear, my purpose is not to say that CPTcannot be useful, but my
      claim is that this overemphasis on method is limited when it comes to a decolonial
      politicaltheory,alsobecauseoftherelationshipthatisentertainedbetweenmethodand
      politics.                                              
        Thetendencytoputmethodasanormcanbetranslatedintoaninstrumentalaccountof
      politicsaswell,preciselybecauseamethodmakesexplicitaspecificrelationshiptoreality
      that is potentially considered the best or more accurate. Following Bonnie Honig’s
      formula (1993), Roxanne Euben argues that this over-emphasis on method operated a
      displacementofpolitics,whichis‘adisplacementofthelocusofpoliticsfromtheworld
      oflaypeopleandpracticestothatofacademics’(2022,5).Basically,politicsbecomesa
      methodological problem. Here, I want to suggest that this normative and instrumental
      accountofpoliticsleadstoleavingthelivedexperience,orthephenomenalreality,aside.
      Indeed, the ‘methodological machine’ entails a certain rationalization of politics that
      changesitslocusfromthelivedexperiencetoadisciplinarymethod.Moreover,thisfocus

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1555     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      onmethodisnotunfamiliartothehistoryofphilosophyandknowledge.Atthebeginning
      of Euromodernity, some philosophers felt the need to depart from the scholastic Aris-
      totelianism and articulate a practical dimension to philosophy. At the intersection of
      scientia and techne, philosophy was conceived to solve practical problems by using
      ‘systematic procedure, or method’ (Kisner 2005, 138). In other words, epistemology
      became the first philosophy.                           
        Inarecentarticle,AdomGetachewandKarunaMantenaaimedatconstitutingananti-
      colonialpoliticaltheoryasacriticalandreconstructiveprojectbyrelyingonGandhi’sand
      Fanon’s work, acknowledging their different geo-political situation and theoretical ap-
      proaches. Yet, for the authors, both Fanon and Gandhi are committed to a critical and
      reconstructiveapproach.Briefly,theirprojectcouldbeassociatedwithapoliticaltheory
      of decolonization that takes the question of imperialism seriously from a non-Western
      perspective. Their work is about going beyond the focus on Eurocentrism that can
      sometimes be present in comparative political theory to propose a paradigm that takes
      critique and reconstruction into account by looking at different authors, from different
      locations.Inotherwords,thecritiqueofEurocentrismisassociatedwithanenlargement
      of political theory’s horizons to also offer a new scope in understanding imperialism,
      decolonization as well as anti-colonial nationalism (Getachew 2019). It is, in a certain
      way,ameanstoputtogetherthetwoagendasofCPTthatIdescribedpreviously(p.2).
      However,Ibelievethatanelementismissingintheequation,moreprecisely,whatFanon
      calledl’expe´rienceve´cue(thelivedexperience)inBlackSkin,WhiteMasks(2015).For
      GetachewandMantena,Fanon’saccountoftheproblemofEurocentrismistiedto‘how
      theenthrallmenttoWesterncategoriesmakesitimpossibletoproperlycognizealternative
      futuresandenunciatestrategiesneededtoattainthem’,fromthatperspective,theysubmit
      that Fanon’s critique is associated to ‘analytical and political models that properly
      corresponded to the specificities of the (post)colonial context’ (Getachew and Mantena
      2021,367).However,thisunderstandingofananalytic-politicalmodelthatwouldgivea
      politicalstrategytofollowisproblematicbecauseitmissesFanon’saccountofthelived
      experiencethatcannotbereducedtoananalytic-politicalmodel,amethod.Itcreatesan
      accountofpoliticswhereamodelimpliesfollowingaspecificstrategytobeattained.In
      thatcase,politicsisunderstoodaspoiesis,itisameans-endactivityratherthanapraxis.
      Thinking from the zone of nonbeing                     
      Sofar,Idescribedandcriticizedsometheoriesthatcouldbeassociatedwithagestureof
      decolonizationbyraisingpointssuchasitscontinentallogicaswellastheoveremphasis
      on method that displaces the locus of politics to method. In other words, a political
      problem becomes a methodological problem. In what follows, I will sketch another
      directionforadecolonialpoliticaltheorythatcanbesummarizedbytheformula‘thinking
      from the zone of nonbeing’. In doing so, I will specify what I understand by ‘zone of
      nonbeing’ by looking at Frantz Fanon’s account of it, and I will argue for a ‘post-
      continental’ direction to political theory.            
        InBlackSkin,WhiteMasks,Fanondefinedthezoneofnonbeingas‘anextraordinarily
      sterileandaridregion,anutterlynakeddeclivitywhereanauthenticupheavalcanbeborn’
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1556                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      (2015, 2). This citation says two things, 1) it describes the zone of nonbeing and 2) it
      outlines its potential agency, in terms of praxis. Here, I will focus on the first part and
      discussthesecondlater.TherehavebeenseveralinterpretationsofwhatFanonmeantby
      ‘zone of nonbeing’ (Hook 2020; Sexton 2016; Sithole 2016; Thame 2011). However,
      thereissortofaconsensusoverthefactthatitwasreferringtothecolonialracistprocess
      ofdehumanization.ThisfactcouldbesupportedbyanotherpointmadebyFanonwhere
      hestatedthat‘theblackmanhasnoontologicalresistanceintheeyesofthewhiteman’
      (2015, 83). Accordingly, the zone of nonbeing would be the zone of the lack of being.
      Now, there are two different ways to interpret that. First, from the Sartrean perspective
      whereexistenceprecedesessenceandwherethelackofbeing,ofsubstance,isthevery
      condition of being-for-itself as opposed to being-in-itself.4 However, this interpretation
      wouldmissthatthereisnoontologicalresistanceintheeyesofthewhiteman.Hence,the
      lackofbeingiscreated.ThiscouldechowhatNelsonMaldonado-Torresarguedaboutthe
      coloniality of being. Namely, the very construction of humanity (being) by the West
      dependsonabelow-humanity(nonbeing),soaprocessofdehumanization(Maldonado-
      Torres2007).Moreprecisely,itreferstowhathecalledthesub-ontologicaldifferenceas
      the‘differencebetweenBeingandwhatliesbelowBeing’(Maldonado-Torres2007,254).
      Accordingly,LewisGordonputthat‘thisbelow-Otherness[…is]thezoneofnonbeing’
      (2007,10).Therefore,thezoneofnon/beingcanbedescribedastwodifferentmodesof
      existence or being in- and of-the-world.5 Moreover, the relationship between the two
      cannot be thought of as a Self-Other relationship. Indeed, thinking from the zone of
      nonbeingisnottothinkofalterity,buttolookatthisbelow-Otherness,thisnon-Beingas
      both something constitutive of Being as well as the impossibility of Otherness. This is
      whythereisaneedforwhatLewisGordoncalledashiftingofthegeographyofreason.
      Because looking at below-Otherness implies a metatheoretical and philosophical shift.
        Accordingly, my main aim is to (re)introduce to the category of lived experience,
      understoodphenomenologically,thatisnotcentralinComparativePoliticalTheory,and
      to make it central to a decolonial political theory. However, one could argue that this
      phenomenal account of reality is still embedded in the continental logic, even if Fanon
      gaveanon-Westernaccountofit.Indeed,fromwhatIhavesaidsofar,andmysuggestion
      tofocusonthelivedexperience,onecouldarguethatIintendtodisplacepoliticaltheory
      fromananalytictoacontinentallogicortradition.Asamatteroffact,onecouldalsoask
      why I want to push a continental political theory that would be decolonial. To answer
      these concerns, I will argue for a post-continental approach that could be illustrated by
      what Fanon called the ‘zone of nonbeing’.              
        In Black Skin, White Masks, Fanon argued that every ontology is unrealizable in a
      colonizedandcivilizedsociety.Basically,ontologycannotexplainthelivedexperienceof
      the colonized (Fanon 2015, 107–8). Indeed, throughout his book, Fanon showed how
      Hegel’s‘BeingforOther’andSartre’saccountofthenegritude(reducedtoamomentof
      classstruggle)werenotappropriatetounderstandthelivedexperienceoftheblackman.
      His critique of ontology is directed at what could be called continental ontologies, or
      ontologiesthatbelongtothetraditionofcontinentalphilosophy.ForNelsonMaldonado-
      Torres, Fanon’s theorizing is post-continental as he worked ‘to overcome continental
      thought’accordingto‘insightintotherealitiesofcolonizedcontextsandlivedrealities’

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1557     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      (2006,4).Whatisinterestinghereisthatthezoneofnonbeingisnotonlyageographical
      spacebutacontextualizedlivedreality,oradisposition(desPortes2022).Inotherwords,
      itisamodeofexistence.Fromthatperspective,apost-continentalphilosophyisnotonly
      concerned with geographical brandings, since ‘Asia’, ‘Africa’ can also be framed or
      understoodintermsofcontinentalontologyasisthecaseinHegel(2012),Kant(2013),or
      Heidegger’s ontological nationalism (Maldonado-Torres 2004).
        Acritiqueofcontinentallogiccouldthenbeassociatedwithwhatiscalledacritiqueof
      Eurocentrism. However, by mainly focussing on that, it seems as if there would be a
      continentalandanon-continentalunderstandingofaspecificgeography,oraEurocentric
      and a non-Eurocentric understanding. However, if one still follows Enrique Dussel,
      colonialismislessapureantagonismbetweencolonizedandcolonizersbutatotalization,
      understoodasaneclipseoftheOther,ofAlterity,withinoneparadigm.Indeed,colonized
      people do not exist without colonizers, and conversely. Hence, the dilemma is not
      continental vs. non-continental. In other words, the dilemma is not Eurocentrism vs.
      Afrocentrism but a ‘post-continental philosophy [built] on this departure from the
      continentallogic, thus helping todemythologize the idea ofcontinents andputforward
      decolonized [or/and, I would add, decolonial] conceptions of space, time, subjectivity’
      (Maldonado-Torres 2006, 3). Therefore, a decolonial political theory does not only
      change the location but also the geographical (ontological) logic, the metageography
      (Lewis and Wigen 1997). And I believe that what I call ‘thinking from the zone of
      nonbeing’ is a departure from the continental logic that would say ‘thinking from the
      West/non-West’.Inotherwords,itrequiresashiftingofthegeographyofreason.Indeed,
      whatFanoncalledthezoneofnonbeingistheperfectgroundforitpreciselybecauseit
      rejects the ontologies of Being, as non-applicable to those who are within the zone of
      nonbeing. Hence, Being is not to be understood from the perspective of Being (conti-
      nental philosophy), but from the one of nonbeing (post-continental philosophy), and it
      exceedstheWest/non-Westdivide.Indeed,Beingandnon-Beingcanbefoundwithinthe
      samelocation,ifonetakesabusinthesegregatedUSAwithdifferentplacesforblackand
      white people. Accordingly, I suggest sketching a decolonial political theory that is in-
      terested in modes of existence in the zone of nonbeing, taken as the ground where
      decolonial politics happens, not only as a project to follow but also as praxeis.
        Tosummarize,thezoneofnonbeingisnotjustageographicallocation,anopportunity
      torevisitthecanonsofpoliticalthought,orthelocationofthetheorizationofanormative
      decolonial model out of it, but an existential disposition where the decolonial can be
      theorizedandunderstoodwithinthecolonial,orasdirectlyaddressingit.Indeed,theidea
      of coloniality does not only uncover Eurocentrism, but it also postulates that the or-
      ganizationoftheworldisstillcolonialinitsstructuration.Therefore,forsomethingtobe
      ‘decolonial’ it does not necessarily need to get ‘decolonized’. For example, marronage
      can be seen as a decolonial praxis that still happens in a colonial world.6 Yet, those
      decolonial praxeis question the continental ontology, the colonial organization of the
      world,andthereforetheydisplaceitandwithintheveryaction,theyopenthepossibility
      ofnewgeographies.InFanon’sdefinition,inthezoneofnonbeing,‘anauthenticupheaval
      canbeborn’(2015,2).Inotherwords,itisthegroundofpossibility-orthepremises-ofa
      counter-world, such as marronage was for Sylvia Wynter (Wynter 1970, 124).

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1558                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
        Before going further, I want to specify what I mean by ‘the zone of nonbeing as an
      existentialdisposition’.Here,IfollowLewisGordon’sdistinctionbetweenexistentialism
      and existential philosophy. For him, ‘the body of literature that constitutes European
      existentialism is but one continent’s response [continental philosophy] to a set of
      problems that date from the moment human beings faced problems of anguish and
      despair’(2000,7).Hence,existential philosophy,ortheexistentialapproach,cannotbe
      reduced toaspecifictradition anditslocation,itisrather a waytoaddressproblems of
      freedom, agency, or sociality ‘through a focus on the human condition’ (L.R. Gordon
      2000, 7). Therefore, a post-continental investigation of the zone of nonbeing offers a
      specificwayofinvestigatingcertainproblems,whichalsoentailsadifferentrelationship
      toreality.Inacertainway,anexistentialapproachwouldlookatdifferentpraxeissuchas
      freedomorviolenceandseehowtheyenlightenourunderstandingofcolonialismandthe
      possibility of its dismantlement, or the decolonial modes of being and organization,
      decolonialsocialitywithinacolonialsociety.Alltheseproblemsassumeadifferentway
      tolookat,toinvestigate,and,asIsaid,adifferentrelationshiptoreality,lessnormative
      and more phenomenal.7                                  
      Political theory of the                                
                        Damne´s                              
      TosummarizewhatIhavesaidpreviously,thepoliticaltheorythatIamcallingforentails
      an alternative relationship to reality, that takes its distance from the overemphasis on
      methodandaninstrumentalaccountofpolitics,becausethestudyofthehumanworldis
      non-static, it is not a set of causalities or natural law, but a set of human actions which
      cannotbepredicted.Thisiswhy,forFanon,methodneedstobelefttothebotanistandthe
      mathematician(Fanon2015,5).Heinsteadchosetofocusonwhathecalled,following
      the phenomenological tradition, the lived experience. Precisely because this phenome-
      nological focus allows the thinker to ‘suspend’ ontological assumptions to offer a dif-
      ferent account of reality, more phenomenal. Here, two ‘suspensions’, if you will, are
      needed. The suspension of the ontological account of politics as instrumental and the
      suspensionofcontinentalontology.Accordingly,Iwillsketchanalternativedirectionfor
      a decolonial political theory that needs to take politics as first philosophy rather than
      epistemology. I will make my point by showing how Aime´ Ce´saire emphasized the
      importance of politics and how Frantz Fanon illustrated the ‘thinking from the zone of
      nonbeing’bybuildingapoliticaltheoryofthedamne´s(damned).Namely,heshowcased
      theconstitutionofarevolutionarysubjectfromthezoneofnonbeing(thedamne´s).This
      accountofthedamne´scouldalsobetakenastypicalofadecolonialpraxisinacolonial
      world. This means, that a political theory of the damne´s would not be about the de-
      colonization of praxis but about decolonial praxeis. In that sense, the focus on politics
      rather than epistemology makes the decolonial, as a political action, precede decolo-
      nization and not the other way around.                 
        InExistentiaAfricana,LewisGordonarguesthatDuBoiscreatedahumanisticsocial
      science,inotherwords,asocialsciencethatputshumanbeingsashumanbeingsatthe
      center of the investigation. This statement echoes what I said earlier about seeing non-
      Western thoughts as a problem to solve that also creates an instrumental relationship
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1559     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      between theory and practice by seeing politics as a means-end activity. As I argued
      previously, the political problem is the continental logic, namely, the colonial/racial
      structurationoftheworldthatcouldbeassimilatedtowhatDuBoiscalled‘thecolorline’
      (2008).Toputitdifferently,thequestionwemustfacenowismetatheoretical.Following
      LewisGordon,themetatheoreticalquestionweansweredis‘Howtheoryisformulated?’
      (2000,79)Indeed,theproblemwouldbetoseethenon-WestasaproblemofOthernessto
      solve. In contrast, the decolonial political theory that I suggest proposes a different
      metatheoretical approach, that does not intend to methodologically solve a political
      problem.Ratheritisonethat,ifyouwill,looksatpoliticalresponsestopoliticalproblems.
      AsmuchasLewisGordonhighlightedDuBois’insistenceonstudyingblackpeopleas
      havingproblemsratherthanproblematicpeople,Aime´Ce´sairefollowed,whatIconsider
      asimilarapproachinhisLettertoMauriceThorez,whichishisresignationletterfromthe
      French Communist Party (PCF). To elucidate this, I will show how Aime´ Ce´saire ad-
      dresses the problematic dimensions of the zone of nonbeing. Basically, what are the
      problems ofpeopleinthatzoneandwhatarethepotentialresponses? Inotherwords,I
      will define what could be the metatheoretical basis of a decolonial political theory that
      looks at the zone of nonbeing.                         
        InhisLettertoThorez,Ce´sairedescribedtwoproblemswiththeFrenchCommunist
      Party (PCF). First, he talked about Stalinism and the relationship of the party with the
      people who have communism as an aspiration. He argued that this relationship trans-
      formedanideal,adream(socialism)intoanightmare(Stalinism).Itisbasicallyacritique
      ofStalinismandbureaucracy,aswellastheincapacityofthePCFtomakeitsautocritique.
      ThisfirstproblemcouldbeseenasinternaltothePCF.However,Ce´saireraisedanother
      related problem that concerns those who are in the zone of nonbeing. He talked about
      problemsthatarerelatedto‘hisqualityofamanofcolor’(Ce´saire1956).Morethanthat,
      Ce´sairedescribedtwodifferentways,tracks,orpaths.Heopposedhis‘ways’[voies]to
      those of French communism that cannot be confused. This statement comes from a
      consciousness, what one could call a racial or colonized consciousness of a specific
      disposition,amodeofbeinginandof-the-world,inthezoneofnonbeing.Thismodeof
      existencecannotbeconfusedwiththeonefromthezoneofbeingpreciselybecauseofits
      singularities.Ce´sairetalksaboutwhatcouldbeconsideredasfoursingularitiesofthezone
      of nonbeing. One concerns its location (zone of nonbeing), one is social and political
      (specificsocialandpoliticalproblems),oneishistorical(colonization,enslavement),and
      another is cultural. Following up on that, Ce´saire mentioned a principal question or
      questioning specific to the zone of nonbeing, that almost encompasses the four above-
      mentioned dimensions: the colonial question, which ‘cannot be treated as a part of a
      biggerwhole’(Ce´saire1956).Here,thereisanexplicitcritiqueofclassreductionism,but
      onecouldalsoseeanimplicitcritiqueofwhatImentionedearlier.Indeed,whatIcalled
      thenon-Westasapoliticalproblemtomethodologicallysolveentailsaconsideration.It
      openstothequestion‘Whydoesthisproblemneedtogetmethodologicallysolved,
      andforwhatpurpose?’.Onecouldsay,thisproblemneedstogetsolvedtocreatea
      dialogue. For instance, in her book Cosmopolitan Political Thought, Farah Godrej
      suggested looking at Gandhi’s account of non-violence which could be useful to
      solve Western problems. It is a way to find non-Western solutions to Western

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1560                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      problems (Godrej 2011, 73). However, this instrumental way of seeing the rela-
      tionship between knowledge and practice can be related to the class reductionism
      that Ce´saire criticized. As much as race is seen as something that could help class
      struggletomoveforward,amomentofclassstruggle8ifyouwill,here,non-Western
      thoughts and practices are seen as a moment of Western thoughts or practices.
      However, Ce´saire’s letter suggests another relationship between knowledge and
      practice, or theory and politics.                      
        Thatsaid,nowIwanttoemphasizeanimportantphilosophicaldimensionoftheletter.
      Moreprecisely,thedimensionthatenlightensaspecificrelationshipbetweenpracticeand
      knowledge for Ce´saire. In an article, Nelson Maldonado-Torres argued that Ce´saire
      constructedananti-orcounter-CartesiansystemthathecalledCesairianmediation.For
      Maldonado-Torres, the Discourse on Colonialism is ‘the response of a black colonial
      subject to the Cartesian project’ (2016, 438). In other words, Ce´saire offers another
      method, a new discourse on method that radically differs from Descartes because he
      introduced ‘a new type of critical reason, which rest on the “clarity” that colonized
      subjects have of the perversity of theEuropean civilization project’ (Maldonado-Torres
      2016, 438). However, while I am sympathetic to Maldonado-Torres’ argument, I think
      that Ce´saire’s move is more fundamental than a new discourse on method. Indeed, by
      placing Ce´saire’s work on the epistemological ground of Descartes, I believe that a
      fundamentalphilosophicalswitchoperatedbyCe´saireisoccluded,namely,thechangeof
      firstphilosophy.Moreprecisely,IbelievethatCe´sairemadepolitics9asfirstphilosophy
      instead of epistemology. The problem of placing epistemology as first philosophy has
      been discussed extensively above. The question of first philosophy is related to the
      question of truth. For Aristotle, metaphysics was the first philosophy as ‘the human
      attainmentoftruthisanachievementthatgoesbeyondanyphysicalprocess’(Sokolowski
      2010,6).Ontheotherhand,forDescartes,epistemologywasthefirstphilosophy,which
      would mean that the attainment of truth is achieved through method. This is why, ac-
      cording to what I have said previously, political problems are to be solved by meth-
      odological means. Following that, philosophers such as Heidegger suggested putting
      ontologyasfirstphilosophy,andotherslikeLevinas,proposedethicsasfirstphilosophy,
      butthatisnotthesubjectmatterhere.Now,IwanttosuggestthattheLettertoMaurice
      Thorez describes more explicitly than the Discourse on Colonialism politics as first
      philosophy.                                            
        Intheletter,Aime´Ce´saireadvocatedaCopernicanrevolutioncharacterizedbywhathe
      calleda‘righttoinitiative’[droita`l’initiative].Thisrighttoinitiativeismainlypoliticalin
      Ce´saire’s letter but it could also be considered from a theoretical perspective. Indeed,
      specificpoliticalproblems(colonization)aretobeaddressedpoliticallyandtheoretically
      fromthezoneofnonbeing.Inotherwords,peopleinthezoneofnonbeingareconsidered
      as people having problems and addressing them, rather than problematic people.
      Moreover, this right to initiative is, for Ce´saire, attached to responsibility. Namely, to
      attunethoughtsandactions‘tothepoliticalrealitiesofMartinique’(Kemedjio2010,89),
      so to the zone of nonbeing. What is expressed here is the coincidence of theory and
      practice in their mode of being in- and of-the-world. This statement goes against the
      constitutionof apurelynormative theory that wouldmake therelationshipbetween the

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1561     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      bios theoretikos and the bios politikos instrumental. Moreover, this instrumental rela-
      tionship assumes a separation between the two since a theory can be implemented in
      different contexts. Some could argue that rather than a pure imposition, there is a
      translation of theory to different contexts. Yet, in Ce´saire’s, there is a coincidence of
      thoughtandaction,thinking/theorizingcannotbesimplytranslatedinadifferentcontext
      astheFrench‘bonjour’istranslatedinto‘hola’or‘buenosmanana’inSpanishdepending
      on the context. Rather, here the translation entails an actualization of the thought itself
      precisely because of its co-dependency to action. Therefore, it cannot be reduced to a
      methodologicalproblemasautonomousfromaction.Thequestionoftruthisrelatedtothe
      oneofpolitical actionin itsopenness. AsI said, it goesagainstthepurelyinstrumental
      view of politics. A specific theory is not something to be applied, the translation goes
      together with an actualization that could potentially totally transform the theory. To il-
      lustratethatpoint,onecouldlookatFanon’scritiqueofHegel’sontologyofbeing-withas
      I argued previously. In Black Skin, White Masks, Fanon argued that Hegel’s ontology
      cannot be used to understand black existence nor the possibility of black liberation
      precisely because the white/black relationship cannot be reduced to Hegel’s ontology
      which presupposes a white/white relationship. Therefore, thinking phenomenologically
      aboutthebeing-withaswellasthepossibilityofliberationneedsanactualization,or,as
      Fanonargued,adeparturefrom(Hegel’s)ontologyingeneral,thatcouldtaketheformof
      whatLewisGordoncalledanontologicalsuspension(2000,79).Hence,thequestionis
      lessaboutthe‘how’oftranslationingeneralbutmorefundamentallyaboutwhatcanand
      cannot be translated. Following Ce´saire’s letter, Marxism can only be translated to the
      price of its transformation/actualization precisely because some elements of Marxism
      cannot be translated. This point has been raised by Sylvia Wynter and can also be il-
      lustratedbytheBlackMarxisttraditionandCedricRobinson’sworkonracialcapitalism
      (Myers 2022; Robinson 2021).                           
        Ibelievethatthedisplacementofepistemologyforpoliticsismadepossibleprecisely
      becauseofthedisplacementofthemetatheoreticalquestionintheLetter.Byseeingthe
      (ex)colonized not as a problem but as people having problems, the problem is not
      primarily methodological but political. Precisely because the colonial division of the
      world isnot naturalizedbutproblematized as being political. ThisCesairian meditation
      couldbeassociatedwithwhatFrantzFanoncalled‘sociogeny’.Indeed,asIsaidbefore,
      Fanonurgedustoleavemethodsasidetostudythesocialworld,preciselybecausehuman
      actionscreatetheworldandnotasetofcausalities.Thereisasocio-genesisoftheworld.
      However,thatsaid,Fanonalsoaddedanimportantaccounttothezoneofnonbeing,its
      inhabitants, the damne´s. Indeed, within a continental logic or ontology, there is a
      ‘forgetfulnessofthedamned’(Maldonado-Torres2004,36).Therefore,foradecolonial
      politicaltheorytoputpoliticsasfirstphilosophymeanstolookatthedamne´sinthezone
      ofnonbeing.Thereisthepossibilitytolookatthepoliticalaspoliticalactionalternatively.
      Indeed,becausedamnationhasanon-dialecticalcharacter(Maldonado-Torres2004,42),
      thelogicofself-otherdoesnotworkandpoliticstakesanotherperspective.Thiscanbe
      visibleinwhatIcallFanon’spoliticaltheoryofthedamne´s.Indeed,inTheWretchedof
      the Earth (2002), Fanon described the emergence of a new revolutionary subject and
      praxis, especially through his account of violence. Looking at the question of violence

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1562                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      fromtheperspectiveofepistemologywouldbetoaskwhetherviolenceisnecessaryora
      goodmethodornottoachievepoliticalends.However,lookingfromtheperspectiveof
      politicsasfirstphilosophyoffersanotherstance.AsLewisGordonargues,inthezoneof
      nonbeing,thedebateisnotabout‘violenceornonviolence’preciselybecause‘thereisno
      roomtoappearnonviolently’(2007,11).Therefore,lookingatthequestionofviolence
      from the perspective of the zone of nonbeing gives a different account of reality and
      politicalaction.Itisnotaboutthejustificationorlegitimationofviolence.Thequestion
      wouldbe,whatdoesviolence,asapoliticalaction,oraswhatFanoncalledthe‘absolute
      praxis’ tells us about reality.                        
        Accordingly, I intend to suggest another account of political reality that could be
      consideredphenomenal.Ihavealreadymentionedthe‘livedexperience’extensively,but
      IwillfocusmoresystematicallyonitbylookingatFanon’saccountofviolence.AsNeil
      Roberts argues, Fanon’s account of violence cannot be taken as instrumental (Roberts
      2004).Indeed,Fanon’sinterestwasnotinastrategic/instrumentaltheoryofviolence10but
      inthenatureortherealityoftheconstitutionofviolenceintheAlgeriancontext(Fanon
      2002,72).Thisentailsadifferentrelationshiptoreality.Therealityofviolence,forFanon,
      istobefoundinlivedexperience,notonlyasasetofempiricaldataorasamaterialityof
      colonialismbutalsophenomenally.Inotherwords,thequestionsare:whatdoescolonial
      violence do to the colonized existence? How does violence inform their being-in-the-
      world?Indeed,inthechapterOnViolenceinTheWretchedoftheEarth,Fanonshowed
      that thinking about colonialism is not only a systematic thinking about institutions, the
      state, or government. Colonialism goes deep down to the bodily level, it affects and
      changesthebodyofthecolonizedaswellhis/herbodyschemaandbodyimage,meaning
      his/her possibility of motion in the world (Ataria and Tanaka 2020; des Portes 2023).
      Fanon used a bodily metaphor to describe the being in the world of the colonized, as a
      being in the zone of nonbeing. His description of the muscular tetany of the colonized
      goeshandinhandwiththedescriptionofasquattingcity.Colonialismisnotjustamode
      of being in-the-world, but also of-the-world.          
        Asamatteroffact,thechapteronviolencecouldbedividedintotwoparts,oneonthe
      cityandoneonthecolonizedinhis/herembodiment.Inotherwords,Fanondescribesthe
      modeofbeingdisposedofthecolonized.Fromthatperspective,Fanondoesnotonlyoffer
      amodeloranormativeaccountofcolonialismbutaphenomenaloneaswell.Thismeans
      that politics is an action that informs and transforms the individual in relation to the
      collectiveandtheworld.Hedoesnotunderstandpoliticsasamodeltofollow,but,inthat
      case,astheprocessofmutationofcolonialviolence(Ajari2014,237).Fanonhighlighted
      the raw embodied phenomenal reality of colonialism which echoes his formula ‘O my
      body,makemeamanwhoalwaysquestions’(2015,181).This‘IamembodiedthereforeI
      think’displacestheCartesian‘IthinkthereforeIam’byplacingtheprimacyonembodied
      existence,andinthatcaseinitspoliticaldimension.However,itdoesnotmeanthatthere
      are no material and empirical dimensions to colonialism, but as Lewis Gordon argued,
      ‘violence is fundamentally subjective apprehension of objective reality’ (1996, 303).
      Therefore,colonialismisnotjustapolitico-legalrelationshipbutamodeofexistencethat
      has its own temporality, embodiment, and possibilities of upheaval. That second di-
      mension of the zone of nonbeing, as a zone where an upheaval can happen, relates to

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1563     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Ce´saire’srighttoinitiativeasitlooksathowtheseinitiatives,thesepoliticalactions,both
      makeusunderstandtherealityofcolonialismandhowtheyshaperealityandcreatenew
      formsoflife.Tosummarize,apoliticaltheoryofthedamne´sisonethatplacespoliticsa
      firstphilosophyandthatdoesnotthinkoftheBeing-withintermsofSelf-Otherdialectic
      butlooksatpoliticalphenomenatoenlightenrealityoranunderstandingofreality.Itis
      notanepistemicpriorityonpositionalitylikestandpointepistemology,butapriorityput
      uponpoliticalactionas1)responsetopoliticalproblemsand2)asthegenesisofsocial
      realityandphenomena.Inotherwords,itisnottheindividualthatgivesprivilegedaccess
      to political action and phenomena, but those political phenomena/actions that give
      privileged access to the relationship of the individual to others and the world.
        Throughout this article, I suggested giving an alternative direction for a decolonial
      politicaltheory.Indoingso,IanalyzedwhatIconsidertobesomelimitsofComparative
      Political Theory from a decolonial perspective, which are its continental logic and its
      overfocus on methodology. As a result, I argued against the tendency to give method-
      ological solutions to political problems by turning these political problems into meth-
      odologicalones.Accordingly,Isuggestedputtingpoliticsratherthanepistemologyasfirst
      philosophy. By grounding my work on Aime´ Ce´saire and Frantz Fanon, I argued for a
      politicaltheorythatlooksfromthezoneofnonbeingasagroundforthinkingprecisely
      because it goes beyond the continental logic. My aim was not to reject Comparative
      Political Theory but to propose an alternative way to look at reality from a decolonial
      perspective, in order to outline an existential decolonial political theory. I believe that
      these different approaches are complementary. If as Karl Jaspers (2010) had it, there is
      always more to reality, then a phenomenal account of reality is non-exclusive to an
      empirical, normative, or materialist one.              
      ORCID iD                                               
      Charlesdes Portes https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8232-5110.
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
       1. Theconceptof‘coloniality’wascoinedbyAnibalQuijano,itreferstothestillexisting/ongoing
         structure of colonialism after the formal decolonisation ofex-colonised countries.
       2. Depending on the institutions, the subfields are American Politics, Comparative Politics,
         Political Behaviour,PoliticalMethodology,andInternational Relations.
       3. ForAdam Burgos,‘Internal colonialism is,simply,the idea that acolonized population can
         existwithinthestatetowhichitostensiblyalreadybelongs,asacommunitycolonizedbyother
         members of the samesociety rather than byaforeign invader’ (2023, 136).
       4. For Sartre, the being-in-itself corresponds to a substance and the for-itself to pure existence
         withoutsubstance,tothenothingnessfromwhichaconsciousnessprojectitselfinthefuture.
         Forinstance,achairisabeing-in-itself,however,thehumanbeingisafor-itself,andtheylivein
         badfaithwhentheyescapethefreedomofthefor-itself,tofindsecurityinthein-itself.Inother
         words,whentheirlifeisruledbyapreconceivedroletofollowleavingnospaceforfreedom.
         SeeSartre’sexample ofthe waiter inL’eˆtreet lene´ant(Gallimard, 1943).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1564                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
       5. ThisdistinctioncomesfromMauriceMerleau-Ponty.Humanbeingsarenotonlyin-the-world
         like aplate is onatable but also of-the-world as theyare partof it.
       6. See(Roberts 2015)                                  
       7. Aphenomenologicalaccountofrealityisaboutthe‘how’ofourbeingintheworldwithothers,
         howweexperiencetheworldwearein.Accordingly,‘phenomenaarethewaysinwhichwe
         findourselvesbeinginrelationtotheworldthroughourday-to-dayliving’(Vagle2018,20).
       8. SeeFanon’s critiqueof Sartre’sBlack Orpheusin White Skin,Black Masks.
       9. Here I understandpolitics as anaction thathas decolonization as ahorizon.
      10. Bystrategic/instrumentalviolence,Imeanviolenceasameans-endactivity.See(Ajari2014).
      References                                             
                                                             
      Ajari, Norman. 2014. “Race et violence : Frantz Fanon a` l’e´preuve du postcolonial.”. PhD,
         Universite´ Toulouse leMirail - Toulouse II, theses.hal.science. https://theses.hal.science/tel-
         01338946                                            
      Ataria,Yochai,andTanaka,Shogo.2020.“WhenBodyImageTakesovertheBodySchema:The
         CaseofFrantzFanon.”HumanStudies43.no.4:653–665.DOI:10.1007/s10746-020-09543-
         6.                                                  
      Bowden,Brett.2008.“TheEbbandFlowofPeoples,Ideas,andInnovationsintheRiverofInter-
         civilizationalRelations:TowardaGlobalHistoryofPoliticalThought.”InWesternPolitical
         ThoughtinDialoguewithAsia,editedbyTakashiShogimen,andCaryJ.Nederman,87–108.
         Lanham,MD:Lexington Books.                          
      Burgos, Adam. 2023. “Internal Colonialism and Democracy.” Philosophy Today 67. no. 1:
         135–152. DOI:10.5840/philtoday202327472.            
      Castro-Gómez, S. 2021. Zero-Point Hubris. Science, Race, and Enlightenment in Eighteenth-
         CenturyLatin America. Lanham,MD:Rowman & Littlefield.
      Ce´saire, Aime´. 1956. “La lettre a` Maurice Thorez.” L’Humanite´. https://www.humanite.fr/node/
         488777                                              
      Dallmayr,Fred.2004.“BeyondMonologue:ForaComparativePoliticalTheory.”Perspectiveson
         Politics 2.no.02. DOI: 10.1017/s1537592704040137.   
      Dallmayr,Fred.2009.“Hermeneuticsandinter-culturaldialog:linkingtheoryandpractice.”Ethics
         &Global Politics2. no.1: 23–39.DOI: 10.3402/egp.v2i1.1937.
      Dallmayr, Fred, and Manoochehri, Abbas. 2007. Civilizational Dialogue and Political Thought:
         TehranPapers.Lanham,MD:Lexington Books.             
      desPortes,Charles.2022.“HannahArendt’sHiddenPhenomenologyoftheBody.”HumanStudies
         45.no. 1:139–156. DOI: 10.1007/s10746-021-09614-2.  
      desPortes,Charles.2023.FreedomPrecedesLiberation:HannahArendt,Feminism&Coloniality.
         Leeds:PhD, University of Leeds.                     
      DuBois,W.E.B.2008.The Soulsof BlackFolk.Oxford: OxfordWorld’s Classics.
      Dussel, Enrique. 1995. The Invention of the Americas: Eclipse of “the Other” and the Myth of
         Modernity.New York: Continuum Intl PubGroup.Translated byMichael D.Barber.
      Dussel,Enrique,andMendieta,Eduardo.1998.TheUndersideofModernity:Apel,Ricoeur,Rorty,
         Taylor,&the Philosophy ofLiberation. Indexededitioned. NewJersey: Humanities Press.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1565     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Euben, Roxanne L. 2022. ““Comparative Political Theory” and the Displacement of Politics.”
         Philosophy and Global Affairs. DOI: 10.5840/pga202282925. https://www.pdcnet.org/pdc/
         bvdb.nsf/purchase?openform&fp=pga&id=pga_2022_0999_8_29_25
      Fanon,Frantz. 2002. TheWretchedof the Earth.NewYork: Grove Press.
      Fanon,Frantz. 2015. BlackSkin, WhiteMasks.London:Pluto Press.
      Getachew,Adom. 2019.Worldmaking afterEmpire. Princeton: PrincetonUniversity Press.
      Getachew, Adom, and Mantena, Karuna. 2021. “Anticolonialism and the Decolonization of Po-
         liticalTheory.”CriticalTimes4,no.3:359–388.DOI:10.1215/26410478-9355193.https://
         read.dukeupress.edu/critical-times/article/4/3/359/173563/Anticolonialism-and-the-
         Decolonization-of                                   
      Godrej,Farah.2011.CosmopolitanPoliticalThought:Method,Practice,Discipline.Oxford,NY:
         Oxford University Press.                            
      Gordon,JaneAnna. 2014. Creolizing Political Theory: Reading Rousseauthrough Fanon. New
         York:Fordham University Press.                      
      Gordon,LewisR.1996.“Fanon’sTragicRevolutionaryViolence.”InFanon:ACriticalReader,
         edited by Lewis Gordon, T. Denean Sharpley-Whiting, and Renee T. White, 372. Oxford:
         Wiley.                                              
      Gordon,LewisR.2000.ExistentiaAfricana:UnderstandingAfricanaExistentialThought.1sted.
         NewYork: Routledge.                                 
      Gordon,LewisR.2006.DisciplinaryDecadence:LivingThoughtinTryingTimes.1sted.Boulder,
         CO:Routledge.                                       
      Gordon, Lewis R. 2007. “Through the Hellish Zone of Nonbeing: Thinking through Fanon, Di-
         saster,andtheDamnedoftheEarth.”HumanArchitecture:JournaloftheSociologyofSelf-
         Knowledge 5.no.3. https://scholarworks.umb.edu/humanarchitecture/vol5/iss3/3
      Gordon,LewisR.2011.“ShiftingtheGeographyofReasoninanAgeofDisciplinaryDecadence.”
         Transmodernity:JournalofPeripheralCulturalProductionoftheLuso-HispanicWorld1,no.
         2) DOI: 10.5070/T412011810. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/218618vj
      Gordon,LewisR.2023.FearofBlackConsciousness:LewisR.Gordon.1sted.London:Penguin.
      Hegel,GeorgWilhelmFriedrich.2012.LecturesonthePhilosophyofWorldHistory.Cambridge:
         CambridgeUniversity Press.                          
      Honig,Bonnie.1993.PoliticalTheoryandtheDisplacementofPolitics.Ithaca:CornellUniversity
         Press.                                              
      Hook,Derek.2020.“FanonviaLacan,or:DecolonizationbyPsychoanalyticMeans…?”Journal
         oftheBritishSocietyforPhenomenology51.no.4:305–319.DOI:10.1080/00071773.2020.
         1732575.                                            
      Ilieva,Evgenia.2015.“PhilosophicalHermeneuticsandComparativePoliticalTheory.”Journalof
         DialogueStudies3,no.2:5–30.DOI:10.55207/SPPP2454.https://www.dialoguestudies.org/
         wp-content/uploads/2016/02/Journal-of-Dialogue-Studies_Vol-3_No-2_Philosophical_
         Hermeneutics_and_Comparative_Political_Theory.pdf   
      Ilieva,Evgenia.2022.“ComparativePoliticalTheoryandHeterology.”Sophia61.no.4:697–725.
         DOI: 10.1007/s11841-021-00841-9.                    
      Jaspers,Karl. 2010. PhilosophyofExistence. Philadelphia: University of PennsylvaniaPress.
      Kant,Immanuel. 2013.Lectures onAnthropology.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1566                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(9)
                                                             
                                                             
      Kemedjio,Cilas.2010.“Aime´Ce´saire’sLettertoMauriceThorez:ThePracticeofDecolonization.”
         Research in African Literatures 41, no. 1: 87–108. DOI: 10.2979/ral.2010.41.1.87. https://
         www.jstor.org/stable/10.2979/ral.2010.41.1.87       
      Kisner,J.Matthew.2005.“RationalismandMethod.”InACompaniontoRationalism,editedby
         AlanNelson, 137–155. Malden,MA; Oxford:JohnWiley & Sons,Ltd.
      Lewis,MartinW.,andWigen,Ka¨ren.1997.TheMythofContinents:ACritiqueofMetageography.
         Berkeley:The University of California Press.        
      Little, Adrian. 2018. “Contextualizing Concepts: The Methodology of Comparative Political
         Theory.” The Review of Politics 80, no. 1: 87–113. DOI: 10.1017/S003467051700078X.
         https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/review-of-politics/article/abs/contextualizing-
         concepts-the-methodology-of-comparative-political-theory/F32B34E964B6D530C9DCC2D
         88B1B728E                                           
      Lugones,Maria. 2016. “The Coloniality of Gender.”In The Palgrave Handbookof Gender and
         Development: Critical Engagements in Feminist Theory and Practice, edited by Wendy
         Harcourt, 13–33. London:Palgrave MacmillanUK.       
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2006. “Post-continental Philosophy: Its Definition, Contours, and
         FundamentalSources.”Worlds & KnowledgesOtherwise: 1–29.
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2007. “On the Coloniality of Being.” Cultural Studies 21, no. 2-3:
         240–270. DOI: 10.1080/09502380601162548. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
         1080/09502380601162548                              
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2011. “Thinking through the Decolonial Turn: Post-continental In-
         terventionsinTheory,Philosophy,andCritique—AnIntroduction.”Transmodernity:Journal
         of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World 1, no. 2. DOI: 10.5070/
         T412011805.https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59w8j02x
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2016. “Ce´saire’s Gift and the Decolonial Turn.” DOI: 10.1215/
         9780822374367-024. https://read.dukeupress.edu/books/book/2237/chapter-abstract/280978/
         Cesaire-s-Gift-and-the-Decolonial-Turn?redirectedFrom=fulltext
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2017. “On the Coloniality of Human Rights.” Revista Cr´ıtica de
         Cieˆncias Sociais 114: 117–136. DOI: 10.4000/rccs.6793. https://journals.openedition.org/
         rccs/6793                                           
      Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. 2004. “The topology of being and the geopolitics of knowledge:
         Modernity,empire,coloniality.”City8,no.1:29–56.DOI:10.1080/1360481042000199787.
         https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1360481042000199787
      March,AndrewF.2009.“WhatIsComparativePoliticalTheory?”TheReviewofPolitics71.no.4:
         531–565. https://www.jstor.org/stable/25655863      
      Matei-Chesnoiu, M. 2012. Re-imagining Western European Geography in English Renaissance
         Drama.London: PalgraveMacMillan.                    
      Mignolo, Walter D. 2011. The Darker Side of Western Modernity: Global Futures, Decolonial
         Options. Illustrated edition. Durham: DukeUniversity Press.
      Myers,Joshua. 2022.OfBlack Study.London: PlutoPress.   
      Quijano, Anibal. 1992. “Colonialidad y Modernidad/Racionalidad.” Peru´ Ind´ıgena 13. no. 29:
         11–20.                                              
      Quijano, Anibal, and Ennis, Michael. 2000. “Coloniality of Power, Eurocentrism, and Latin
         America.”Nepantla:Views from South 1.no.3: 533–580. 

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
      des Portes                                    1567     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Roberts,Neil.2004.“Fanon,Sartre,Violence,andFreedom.”SartreStudiesInternational10.no.2:
         139–160. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23512882      
      Roberts,Neil. 2015. Freedom as Marronage.Chicago: TheUniversity ofChicago Press.
      Robinson,CedricJ.2021.BlackMarxism:TheMakingoftheBlackRadicalTradition.London:
         PenguinClassics.                                    
      Rose-Redwood,Reuben,BluBarnd,Natchee,Hetoeve˙hotohke’eLucchesi,Annita,Dias,Sharon,
         and Patrick, Wil. 2020. “Decolonizing the Map: Recentering Indigenous Mappings.” Car-
         tographica:TheInternationalJournalforGeographicInformationandGeovisualization55
         (3): 151-162. https://doi.org/10.3138/cart.53.3.intro. https://utpjournals.press/doi/abs/10.
         3138/cart.53.3.intro                                
      Said,Edward. 2003.Orientalism.London: PenguinBooks.    
      Seth, Sanjay. 2020. “A Postcolonial Critique of Comparative Political Theory.” In The Oxford
         Handbook of Comparative Political Theory, edited by Leigh K. Jenco, Murad Idris, and
         MeganC. Thomas, 620–637.Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.
      Sexton,Jared.2016.“Thesociallifeofsocialdeath:Onafro-pessimismandblackoptimism.”In
         Time, Temporality andViolence in InternationalRelations.London:Routledge.
      Sithole,Tendayi.2016.“TheConceptoftheBlackSubjectinFanon.”JournalofBlackStudies47.
         no.1: 24–40.DOI: 10.1177/0021934715609913.          
      Sokolowski, Robert. 2010. “Husserl on First Philosophy.” In Philosophy, Phenomenology, Sci-
         ences:EssaysinCommemorationofEdmundHusserl,editedbyFilipMattens,HanneJacobs,
         andCarloIerna, 3–23.Dordrecht: SpringerNetherlands. Phaenomenologica.
      Sonneborn,Liz.2006. Averroes.Illustrated editioned. NewYork:Rosen Central.
      Temin, David Myer. 2023. “Development in Decolonization: Walter Rodney, Third World De-
         velopmentalism, and “Decolonizing Political Theory”.” American Political Science Review
         117, no. 1: 235–248. https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/american-political-science-
         review/article/development-in-decolonization-walter-rodney-third-world-developmentalism-
         and-decolonizing-political-theory/4C0EDB32FB2D7C70340EE21B7C222151. DOI: 10.
         1017/S0003055422000570.                             
      Thame, Maziki. 2011. “Reading Violence and Postcolonial Decolonization through Fanon: The
         Caseof Jamaica.”TheJournal of PanAfricanStudies 4,no. 7:75–93.
      Vagle,MarkD.2018. CraftingPhenomenological Research.NewYork: Routledge.
      Wynter,Sylvia.1970.“BlackMetamorphosis:NewNativesinaNewWorld.”Unpublishedwork.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             