[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                        fl               2024,Vol.50(5)823–843
      The  neoliberal in uence  on                           
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2022   
                   ’                                         
      South  Africa s early                                  
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      democracy   and  its shortfalls in sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537221079674
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      addressing  economic                                   
      inequality                                             
      Danelle Fourie                                        
      North-WestUniversity,Potchefstroom,SouthAfrica         
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      Inthisarticle,Iwillarguethatearlypost-ApartheidSouthAfricaadoptedcertainneoliberal
      principleswhichcompromisedtheeffortstocombateconomicinequality.Inparticular,Iwill
      showthattheeconomicpoliciesthatSouthAfricaadoptedduringitsearlydemocracyreflect
      coreneoliberalprincipleswhichpromoteaneoliberalpoliticalrationality.Theseeconomic
      policies indicate a pivotal approach from the African National Congress government in
      addressingeconomicinequalityinSouthAfrica.ThedramaticshiftfromtraditionalMarxist
      policies to neoliberal policies reveals the significant influence of a neoliberal global market
      system during South Africa’s early democracy. However, the neoliberal policies failed to
      addresstheproblemofeconomicinequalityinSouthAfrica.Instead,thesepoliciesseemto
      have deepened the existing economic inequality in contemporary South African society.
                                                             
      Keywords                                               
      economic inequality, neoliberalism, democracy, governmentality, political rationality
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Introduction                                           
                                                             
      South Africa has a long and complicated history of political, social and economic in-
      equality.ItischargedwithracialoppressionduetodifferentunjustsystemssuchasDutch
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      DanelleFourie,North-WestUniversity,HendrickVanEckBLVD,Vanderbijlpark,Gauteng2531,South
      Africa.                                                
      Email:danellefourie@nwu.ac.za                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      824                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      andBritishcolonialismandtheApartheidregime.Thistragichistoryandthethousandsof
      liveslostoveracenturyofstruggleonlyaddedtothegreatanticipationofthepolitical,
      socialandeconomicchange.Thepoliticalpowershiftin1994fromthelongheldNational
      Party(NP)totheAfricanNationalCongress(ANC)wasunavoidableduetothegrowing
      national and international pressures that reached their height during the 1980s. These
      pressures came intheform oflocal political and socialuprisings and financialboycotts
      from the international community. Despite the political gains of the ANC in 1994, the
      majority of South Africans quickly became disillusioned and frustrated by the lack of
      socio-economicchangethatwaspromisedbytheANCgovernment(Peet2002,54).Post-
      Apartheid South Africa has become one of the countries with the most economic in-
      equalityintheworld,withoneofthehighestunemploymentrates,andisratedasoneof
      the lowest on the United Nation’s Human Development Index of well-being (Ashman,
      Fine & Newman 2011, 177). In early democratic South Africa, the influence of neo-
      liberalistpolicies,asanormativepoliticalrationalityandasapoliticaleconomicideology,
      contributed to the escalation of economic inequality in South Africa.
        I argue that these neoliberal policies that South Africa adopted post-Apartheid con-
      tributed to the escalation of its economic inequality. Firstly, I will give a description of
      neoliberalismandwhatitentails;thenIwillspecificallydiscusstheReconstructionand
      Development Programme (RDP) and the Growth, Employment and Redistribution
      (GEAR) strategy. These two economic policies reflect the dramatic shift in the ANC’s
      approachtoaddressing economicinequalityinSouth Africa. The ANC’sdramaticshift
      fromtraditionalMarxistpoliciestoneoliberalpoliciesrevealsthesignificantinfluenceof
      aneoliberalmarketsystem.However,theneoliberalpoliciesfailedtoaddresstheproblem
      ofeconomicinequalityinSouthAfrica.Instead,thesepoliciesseemtohavedeepenedthe
      existing economic inequality. I also discuss the external pressures from the general
      businesscommunity,theWorldBank(WB)andtheInternationalMonetaryFund(IMF)
      that led to the neoliberal shift in policy making.     
      A brief description of neoliberalism                   
      Neoliberalismisoften described asaglobal economicsystem towhichallcountries, in
      some form or another, must adhere. It is important to understand neoliberalism as a
      governmentality which legitimizes states by acting as market agents to develop a
      country’seconomy.1However,italsodevelopedasaneoliberalpoliticalrationalitythat
      becamesodominantthatitwasimplementedandadoptedbyothercountriesaswell.2In
      this section, I will discuss the theories of Michel Foucault, David Harvey and Wendy
      Brown to describe neoliberalism and its tendencies.    
        ItisFoucaultinthecollectedworksTheBirthofBiopolitics(Foucaultetal.2008)who
      identifiesthetwomainformsofneoliberalismasstemmingfromitshistoricalcontextsin
      Germany and America. According to Foucault, the German form derived as a critique
      against Nazism and reconstructed post-war economic policies based on Keynesianism.
      TheGermanformofneoliberalismisheavilyinfluencedbytheFreiburgSchoolof‘ordo-
      liberalism’.Foucaultarguedthatordo-liberalistbelievedNazism originatedduetoanti-
      liberal interventions (Foucault et al. 2008, 84; Hardin 2014, 206). The German call for
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         825     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      neoliberalism provided a unique insight into the interventionist problem of the state,
      wherethemarketwas requiredtocheck andbalancethestaterather than theother way
      around. This new insight to neoliberalism led to ‘a new programming of liberal gov-
      ernmentality’ (Foucault et al. 2008, 94). Foucault argued that the American form of
      neoliberalism developed mainly as a response to Keynesian macro-economics and
      policies (Hardin 2014, 207; Foucault et al. 2008, 217–219).
        According to Foucault, the period during America’s War for Independence and the
      periodafterWorldWarIIinGermanyaresimilarintherolethatliberalismhadtoplayin
      relationtothefoundingandlegitimizationofthestate(Hardin2014,207;Foucaultetal.
      2008,217–219).FoucaultarguesthatAmericanneoliberalismisdeeplyingrainedinthe
      American culture. He goes on to state that neoliberalism is prevalent in the way that
      Americansthink,whattheybelieve,howtheyfunctionandtheirgenerallifestyle(Hardin
      2014,207; Foucault et al. 2008, 217–219). America’s deeply seated neoliberalist values
      explaintheusesfor‘marketeconomyandthetypicalanalysesofthemarketeconomyto
      decipher non-market relationships’ (Foucault et al. 2008, 240).
        Harvey echoes Foucault’s theory on neoliberalism and how it perpetuates certain
      economic values. He argues that the political and economic theory of neoliberalism
      equateshumanwell-beingtotheproperfunctioningoftheseeconomicfreedoms(Harvey
      2005,1–5). He claims that neoliberalism didnotincreaseeconomicfreedom,nordidit
      enhancewell-beingforeveryone.Instead,hegoesontoarguethatneoliberalismissimply
      the comprehensive result of the breakdown of class compromises and stagflation made
      duetoyearsofreactivecapitalistaccumulation(Harvey2005,12).Harveyexplainsthat
      neoliberalismisbuiltonthemisguidedbeliefincapitalistaccumulationthatwouldbenefit
      everyone, however it only benefitted the wealthier classes. He states that neoliberalism
      dependsonthe‘trickledowneffects’ofthewealthyspendingmoneytobenefitthegreater
      numbers of society, but this theory only increased inequality (Harvey 2005, 16).3
      However,forHarvey,thegreatsuppressorwithinneoliberalisminthelate20thandearly
      21st Centuries ‘became a new economic orthodoxy regulating public policy’ (Harvey
      2005, 22). He (Harvey 2005, 119) argues that powerful corporate sectors that began to
      have a greater influence on state and government than ever before:
        It has been part of the genius of neoliberal theory to provide a benevolent mask full of
        wonderful-soundingwordslikefreedom,liberty,choiceandrights,tohidethegrimrealities
        oftherestorationorreconstitutionofnakedclasspower…inthemainfinancialcentersof
        global capitalism.                                   
        Inotherwords,itisthecorporationsthathaveafirmgrasponeconomicandindividual
      freedom. This resonates with Foucault’s governmentality, where the state is legitimized
      through its ability to grow and develop the economy, making the state completely de-
      pendent on these big conglomerates. The state is completely dependent on these con-
      glomerates because it needs them to legitimize its existence and to successfully fulfil
      its role.                                              
        Furthermore, Harvey argues that neoliberalism is a political economic ideology that
      restorestheconceptsofaclassdynamic,butwherestateisinservicetothecapitalistelite
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      826                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      (i.e. the corporation state). The elite is, however, no longer the owner of the means of
      production, as was the case in classical Marxism, but rather the owner of corporations.
      Neoliberalismintroducesthestatetoupholdthefreemarketidealofthe‘invisiblehand’
      where ‘the contest is taken out of the competitors’ hands’ (Davies 2014, 63). Harvey
      (2005, 2) defines neoliberalism as follows:            
        Neoliberalismisinthefirstinstanceatheoryofpoliticaleconomicpracticesthatproposes
        that human well-being can best be advanced by liberating the individual entrepreneurial
        freedoms and skills within an institutional framework characterized by strong private
        propertyrights,freemarketsandfreetrade.Theroleofthestateistocreateandpreservean
        institutionalframeworkappropriatetosuchpractices.Thestatehastoguarantee,forexample,
        the quality and integrity of money. It must also set up military, defense, police and legal
        structuresandfunctionsrequiredtosecureprivatepropertyrightsandtoguarantee,byforceif
        needbe,theproperfunctioningofmarkets.Furthermore,ifmarketsdonotexist…thenthey
        must be created, by state action if necessary. But beyond these tasks the state should not
        venture. State interventions in markets (once created) must be kept to a bare minimum
        because, according to the theory, the state cannot possibly possess enough information to
        second-guess market signals (prices) and because powerful interest groups will inevitably
        distort andbiasstate interventions (particularly indemocracies) for theirown benefit.
        Fromthisdefinition,neoliberalismhasoneprimaryobjective:tosustainandencourage
      economic growth. Harvey (2005, 2) describes the governmental intervention of neo-
      liberalism as perpetuating the notion of consumerist culture. To sustain neoliberalism’s
      economic principles, but also to justify state intervention, an underlying political and
      social culture is necessary. Encouraging growth at all costs is the modus operandi of
      neoliberalism.However,theperpetualgrowthisunnatural.Thisisespeciallystressedby
      Brown who argues that the laissez-faire ‘tuck and barter’system that was emphasized
      within liberalism does not function according to rational economic behaviour (Brown
      2005,41).Withinneoliberalismthemarketitselfandeconomicbehaviourareconstructed
      and organized within legal and political institutions that organize and develop market
      systemsandbehaviourstomaximizeeconomicflourishing.AccordingtoBrown(2005,
      41),theeconomicflourishingcanonlybeachievedwithinneoliberalismwhen‘directed,
      buttressedandprotectedbylawandpolicy’,notonlybyeveryinstitutionofsocietybut
      also by every member of society.                       
        Building on Foucault’s concept of governmentality Brown (2005, 40) states that it
      shouldbeunderstoodasapoliticalrationalityaswell.Brownarguesthateverysphereof
      humanexistenceissubmittedtoaneconomicrationalityandthat‘notonlyisthehuman
      beingconfiguredexhaustivelyashomoeconomicus,butalldimensionsofhumanlifeare
      cast in terms of a market rationality’ (Brown 2005, 40). Moreover, the neoliberal in-
      stitutions create policies and practices that reward the individual for actively pursuing
      these rationalities in all dimensions of their existence. From this, Brown reasons that
      neoliberalismcontainsanormativeratherthananontologicalclaimintheomnipresence
      of economic rationality and it is advocated through the development of institutional
      policies that further the developments of these claims. Therefore, neoliberalism is a
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         827     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      ‘constructivist project’ and relies on the ‘task of development, dissemination and in-
      stitutionalization’ of economic rationality and not necessarily on its ‘ontological giv-
      enness’ (Brown 2005, 40–41).                           
        Moreover, Brown (2005, 41) contends that neoliberal states are controlled by the
      markets and this is due mainly to the formulation and development of legal, social and
      economic policies. Firstly, the ‘state openly responds to the needs of markets’ (Brown
      2005, 41). As laid out in Harvey’s definition of neoliberalism, the state functions in
      accordance with market rationality and even supports this rationality with policies that
      sustainandfostermarketsystems.AccordingtoBrown(2005,41–42),thiscreatesstate
      legitimacyandisusedforthemeasurementforthesuccessofthestateandprosperityofa
      nation. Secondly, state practices and decisions become a cost–benefit analysis (Brown
      2005, 42). Complex political and social matters that require discourse and in-depth
      analysisbecomeaneasilysolvablemattersince‘allmattersareframedinentrepreneurial
      terms’(Brown2005,42).Finally,thesolepurposeofthestatethenistoensuretheproper
      functioning of the economic system since it seems that this is their sole responsibility
      (Brown 2005, 42).                                      
        Daviesstatesthat‘thetacitdependenceofeconomiccalculationoncommonnormative
      presuppositionshasnowbecomeentirelyexplicit’(Davies2014,152).Neoliberalismasit
      functions normatively creates the narrative of individuals as entrepreneurs who act as
      rational economic agents in every sphere of their lives. Individual moral autonomy is
      calculatinganddevelopedbyanindividuals’abilityfor‘self-care’.Self-caredescribesa
      person’sability toprovidefor themselves,including their needs and ambitions,making
      them fully responsible for themselves (Brown 2005, 25). Within neoliberalism moral
      responsibilityisequatedtorationalactionthatisusuallydeliberatedwithintermsofcost–
      benefitanalysisandfinancialconsequences.Brownarguesthatresponsibilityforself-care
      istakentonewheightswheretheindividualtakesontheconsequencesfortheiractions,
      eventhoughthiswouldhavethemencounterseverelimitations.Brownconcludesthatthe
      neoliberalcitizenismore‘calculatingratherthanruleabiding,aBenthamiteratherthana
      Hobbesian’ (Brown 2005, 43).                           
        However,althoughindividualsareencouragedtotakeonmoreresponsibilityandact
      with more moral autonomy within society, they are made to be politically passive and
      complacent citizens(Brown2005,43).Browndescribesthemodelneoliberalcitizenas
      onethatstrivestowardstheirownsocial,economicandpoliticalgoalsandshowslittleto
      nointerestinthelargerpublic(2005,43).Furthermore,sinceneoliberalindividualsview
      themselvesandotherswiththisgreaterstandardofresponsibility,itisoftenthoughtthat
      they are in situations of poverty due to choices of their own making. Within the South
      Africancontext,wefindthat‘economicApartheid’persistswithinthecountryandmany
      White middle- and upper-class South Africans have this response to Black poverty-
      stricken citizens.                                     
        For example, Gibson (2011, 35) argues that the notion of a ‘backwardness’ or ‘the
      unpredictability and idiocy of the masses’ remains a constant in South Africa from the
      post-war Keynesian development state and post-development neoliberal state. Gibson’s
      central point is that poor people are often viewed as a burden on society, and it is their
      responsibility to raise themselves out of poverty. Even in projects that focus on

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      828                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      ‘empowering of the poor’ lack the necessary engagement with people in poor com-
      munities to truly develop self-emancipation. Instead, empowerment is offered by ‘en-
      couraging micro-loans and encouraging self-entrepreneurship through financing
      programs and saving schemes’, or ‘training people to understand policy and how to
      engage with it’ (Gibson 2011, 35). Gibson continues by stating that these approaches
      seem ‘concerned with empowerment but, in practice, focus on advocacy rather than
      building relationships at thegrassroots’ (Gibson 2011, 35). The neoliberal lens through
      which these social programs operate show more concern with costs than actual em-
      powermentandself-emancipationofthepoor.Instead,Gibson(2011:36)arguesthatpoor
      communitiesareviewedasproblemsthatneedtobesolvedandwhichcanonlybesolved
      with proper management.                                
      Grinding the GEARs of economic equality                
                                                             
      During the late 1980s and early 1990s the Economic Trends Group (ET), the Macro-
      Economic Research Group (MERG), the World Bank (WB) and the International
      Monetary Fund (IMF) were the organizations leading the debate on macro-economic
      policiesinSouthAfrica.TheprinciplesoftheMERGweremainlyadvocatingfor‘post-
      Keynesian’economicpolicyandfocusedonstateinvestment,whichwouldlaterbranch
      out to private investment to facilitate sustainable economic growth (Peet 2002, 70).
      However,thedocumentwhichMERGpresentedtotheANCin1993onSouthAfrica’s
      earlydemocraticeconomicpolicieswasneveradoptedbytheANC.Narsiah(2002,31)
      states that this marked the first defeat of a true hearted effort of ‘the growth through
      redistribution faction within the ANC’. In late 1993, through a series of workshops, a
      writtendocumentwasfinalizedwiththehelpofintellectualsandvariousrepresentatives
      ofsocialmovements.ThoseinvolvedinthewritingofthisdocumentincludedtheSouth
      African Communist Party (SACP) and the trade union movement represented by the
      Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and other nongovernmental or-
      ganizations (NGOs). The document was the Reconstruction and Development Pro-
      gramme (RDP).                                          
        TheRDPwasadaptedtoprovideabasicneedsapproachthatwouldbasicallyfunction
      asaKeynesiancapitalistwelfaresystem.TheRDPwouldfocusonthedevelopmentofthe
      economy,butalsooninfrastructure,basichealthcareandeducation(Southall2013,91–
      92).In1993,theANCusedtheRDPasitsmanifestoandlateremployedittocraftpolicies
      onceitassumedpoliticalpowerin1994(Peet2002,70;Narsiah2002,31).However,the
      versionoftheRDPdocumentthatwassignedintopolicywasasignificantdeparturefrom
      itsoriginalprinciplesandintentionsoftheorganizationsthatwroteit(thoseorganizations
      beingtheET,theMERG,theSACPandCOSATU).Schneider(2018,209)statesthatthe
      rejection of the original MERG approach was a tragic decision since the economic
      approachthatMERGwassuggestingwasmorerealisticoflate-industrializingcountries
      than the neoliberal approach that solely relies on market mechanisms.
        ThemostimportanttasktotheANCgovernmentwastorectifyandaddressthedeep
      seatedandraciallychargedinequalitywithinSouthAfrica.TheANCgovernmenthadthe
      monumentalresponsibilityofrestructuringthefoundationsoftheSouthAfricaneconomy
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         829     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      to ensure an integrated economic development process. This process necessitated the
      redistribution of wealth and resources, job creation and sustainable growth, as well as
      rapiddevelopmenttosustaingovernmentandpersonalexpenditures.Narsiah(2002,31)
      states that from its inception, the RDP faced problems with the implementation of its
      policies.Thiswasmainlyduetolimitedresourcesthatwerefiercelyguardedbythosein
      the ANC parliament, specifically Thabo Mbeki and Trevor Manual (Southall 2013, 92;
      Narsiah 2002, 31). The pressure to perform these tasks led the ANC to adopt a new
      strategy which stressed that economic growth was necessary and would automatically
      leadtotheachievementofSouthAfrica’ssocialwelfaregoals.Thisstrategyalsoconsisted
      ofincreasingnationalandforeigninvestment,aswellasprivatization.TheRDP’sneed-
      based approach was soon replaced with a supply side approach, especially with the
      increasing pressure on the ANC to perform economic miracles in a competitive global
      economic climate (Cheru 2001, 501).                    
        The ANC government decided to replace the RDP with a new initiative called the
      Growth, Employment and Redistribution (GEAR) strategy in 1996. Cheru (2001, 507)
      statesthatthegovernment’sreasoningforthischangewasthat‘theRDPfunctionednotas
      adevelopmentframework,butasanaggregationofsocialpoliciesdesignedtoalleviate
      poverty without affecting the complex of economic policies and practices that produce
      povertyandinequality’.Formostobservers,thisseemedlikeadramaticchangewithinthe
      ANC policies from ‘social heterodoxy’ to ‘neoliberal orthodoxy’ (Narsiah 2002, 31).
      EveryothereconomicpolicysinceGEARhasfollowedsomeversionoftheseneoliberal
      principlestopromoteeconomicgrowthbyopeningupSouthAfricatointernationaltrade
      (Schneider 2018, 308). Cheru (2001, 507–508) argues that this ideological shift dates
      backtotheearly1990sandthattheANCleadershipmadeastrategicchoicetoalignwith
      neoliberal economic policies. Furthermore, this was a continuation of South Africa’s
      pervious government, the NP led by FW de Klerk, which began exploring neoliberal
      economic policies in the mid-1980s (Cheru 2001, 508).  
        ThiscontinuationmayhavebeenacollaborationthatformedbetweenNelsonMandela
      and FW de Klerk, who both wanted a better future for all South Africans. However,
      Narsiah (2002, 32) contends that the NP’s adoption of neoliberal policies during the
      1980s,especiallyprivatization,wasatleastpartiallypoliticallytactical.Feigenbaumetal.
      (1998, 42–43) arguethat theNPused tactical privatization to eithergain political allies
      abroad or reduce the budget deficit. Moreover, systematic privatization would alter the
      political and economic dynamics and interests of a society shifting most of the re-
      sponsibilityofthegovernmentontotheprivatesector(Feigenbaumetal.1998,42–43).
      AnotherfactorwasthegrowingtensionwithintheNPandfromtheprivatesectoroverthe
      growingeconomiccrisis,specificallythecrisisofforeigninvestment(Marais2011,44).
      ThisledtheNPgovernmenttoimplementprivatizationandderegulationwhichhadthe
      effect of shifting the economic power to large corporations and creating a powerful
      financial sector (Marais 2011, 44). However, Narsiah (2002, 32) argues that the GEAR
      policywasundeniablymarket-orientated,and,inimplementingthispolicy,theANC‘set
      the parameters for the National Party’s privatization initiative to take on a systemic
      character’. Moreover, big conglomerates benefitted even more after the restructuring of
      the economy post-Apartheid, and they shifted many of their assets out of the country,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      830                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      ultimately leaving South Africa with continuously high rates of capital flight (Ashman,
      Fine & Newman 2011, 185–188).                          
        The NP had close ties with the United States, the United Kingdom and its financial
      institutions during the period leading up to the demise of Apartheid. Therefore, the NP
      couldhavesubscribedtotheneoliberalideologiesthatweredominantinthosecountries.
      Klein (2007, 199–200) maintains that the NP used most of their resources to frame the
      economic debate and got businesses within the national and international community
      involved to ensure a favourable outcome in negotiations. The Reserve Bank remained
      independent and private property was written into the Constitution (Klein 2007, 202–
      203).Narsiah(2002,31)arguesthattheANCcametotherealizationthattheycouldnot
      compare to the seasoned big business bureaucrats and complexly articulated economic
      policiesoftheNP.Alltheseargumentsareviable,butintheendtheneoliberalshiftinboth
      the NP and the ANC was the realization of a changing global economic climate. This
      realization came with the acknowledgement of ‘the limitations of national liberation
      movements’ due to growing international pressures that were put upon both parties
      (Ashman, Fine & Newman 2011, 182).                     
        It wasthoughtthat theseneoliberaleconomicpolicieswouldlead torapid economic
      growth that could translate into redistribution, social development, economic empow-
      ermentandjobcreation(GovernmentofSouthAfrica1998,58).Thegovernmenthoped
      toreplicatethesuccessfulreductionofpovertyandinequalitythatwasexperiencedinEast
      Asia (Cheru 2001, 508). Some of the neoliberal policies that were adopted include the
      promotionoffinancialausterity,exportorientateddevelopmentandprivatization.Itwas
      believed that these policies would create a competitive environment and that the de-
      regulationofmarketswouldenticeforeigninvestment(Peet2002,72).However,GEAR
      is very different from the mixed-economy approach that was implemented in Taiwan,
      SingaporeandSouthKorea(Cheru2002,508–509).Themixed-economicapproachwas
      not solely focused on market-led solutions but also paid close attention to the social
      developmentprogramssuchaslandreform,incomeinequality,healthcareandeducation.
      A ‘basic needs’ economy was developed that protected its workforce and allowed in-
      dustries tobecomecompetitive before allowingfor privatizationand productionfor the
      exportation of markets. However, contrary to this, the GEAR strategy relied upon
      stimulatinggrowththroughanexport-orientedeconomyandlarge-scaleprivatizationin
      South Africa (Narsiah 2002, 32–33). Narsiah (2002, 32) states that the GEAR policies
      lacked integration and relied too heavily on the private sector to promote social de-
      velopment.Themixed-economyapproachallowedforrapiddomesticeconomicgrowth
      in Asian markets without encountering high debts or job losses (Cheru 2002, 509).
      However, for South Africa, its GEAR strategy failed to meet its economic growth and
      employment targets.                                    
        TheGEARpolicydidnotattractforeigndirectinvestmentasithadhopedtodo,dueto
      a combination of local and global factors. Locally, the rising wage bill of State-Owned
      Enterprises (SOE), government debt and currency depreciation, amongst others, led to
      capital flight to developed markets. Globally, macro-economic factors and negative
      economic problems led to aversion to risky assets in developing markets like South
      Africa, which did not support investment. The continuation of privatization and

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         831     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      deregulation made it easier for wealthy corporations such as Anglo American, Old
      Mutual, SA breweries and Liberty Life to relocate their assets to the world’s leading
      financialcentresandexportevenmorecapitaloutofthecountry(Makgetla2004,276).
      Manycorporationsthathadundergonecorporate‘unbundling’andweresoldduringthe
      Apartheid era were now perceived as internationally competitive. Consequently, these
      corporations were ‘nominally reducing conglomerate concentration, but increasing
      concentration within sectors’ (Ashman, Fine & Newman 2011, 183).
        South Africa’s main form of foreign investment was still within the Mineral-Energy
      Complex (MEC) sectors. The reliance on the MEC sectors had the result of the Rand
      beingextremelydependentonshort-terminflowcapitalinvestment,whilebeingproneto
      big capital outflows. Moreover, many labour-intensive manufacturing jobs, that are
      prevalent within the MEC sectors, were lost due to the abandonment of tariff barriers
      (Ashman,Fine&Newman2011,183).ThesystematicprivatizationinSouthAfricaledto
      significant job losses in general. This is mostly due to corporations operating based on
      maximizing profit and cutting on labour wages was the easiest way to obtain greater
      profits(Cheru2002,509;Narsiah2002,32–33).‘Private-publicpartnershipsarethenew
      buzz-words.Thesenewinitiativesarebeingdressedupinthegarbofblack-empowerment
      andentrepreneurialism’(Narsiah2002,33).However,thefactremainsthatthestatedid
      nothingtoprotecttheseworkersfrombeingretrenchedorexploitedbythesecorporations.
        However, there were some advantages to the GEAR policies. Due to the GEAR
      policies, South Africa experienced rapid economic growth, whereas macro-economic
      indicatorsgavestabilitytoexistinginvestorsandinternationalfinancialinstitutionssuch
      as the WB and the IMF. South Africa adhered to the global market rationality, which
      allowedfortheopeningofmarkets,therapidgrowthoftheeconomyandthecooperation
      of a larger international community. However, since 2008, national and international
      events dramatically affected the prospects of South Africa’s economic growth. Inter-
      nationally, the financial collapse of 2008 and the leading governments’ attempts at
      quantitativeeasingto‘savethebanksbyprintingmoneyandcuttingpublicservicesled
      inevitablytoasovereigndebtcrisis’(Hart&Padayachee2013,72).Thefinancialcrisisof
      2008lefttheworldeconomyinarecessionforwhichtherewasnorealsolutionexceptto
      seeitthrough.Forsomecountries,thequantitativeeasingseemedtorestoreorstabilize
      theasset markets. However,itdidnotstimulate demandorjobcreation,oraddressany
      otherpressingsocio-economic problems ofthepoor.Political unrestwascommonplace
      allovertheworldandcouldbeseeninprotestandpoliticalmovementssuchastheArab
      Spring, Occupy Wall Street, the London riots and the Russian protest. The neoliberal
      policiesthatpromisedeconomicgrowthandprosperitywerenowunderthreatduetotheir
      owndownfall,notonlyinSouthAfricabutalsoglobally(Hart&Padayachee2013,72–
      74).                                                   
        Nationally,inlate2008,afterthefullforceofthefinicalcrisishadbroken,SouthAfrica
      would encounter another drastic change. South Africa’s President Thabo Mbeki had
      resigned, or more accurately was politically forced out, and was succeeded by Jacob
      Zuma (Hart & Padayachee 2013, 74). The political and economic consequences of
      Mbeki’s‘forcedeviction’arestillunclear(Hart&Padayachee2013,74).Before2008,the
      market economy was perceived as relatively stable, due to growing international

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      832                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      cooperationandstableforeigninvestment.Thiswasalsodueto‘reducingbudgetdeficits,
      debtburdensandinflations,andlarge-scaleredistributingthroughsocialtransfer,notably
      pensionsandchild-supportgrants,andspendingonserviceinfrastructure’(Fourie2017,
      60). However, since 2008, ‘the budget surplus disappeared and was replaced by a
      persistentlyhighbudgetdeficit’alongwithanincreaseincorruptionandlackofservice
      delivery(Fourie2017,60–61).Thisdramaticeconomicdownturnscaredoffnationaland
      internationalinvestorswhichexacerbatedtheeconomicspiral.Thestatewasinpolitical,
      social and economic constraints and unfortunately the poor were the ones to suffer the
      most under these constraints (Fourie 2017, 61).        
        TheresultisaverylimitedchangeintheearlydemocraticSouthAfricawithuneven
      development and distribution (Ashman, Fine & Newman 2011, 186). On the one hand,
      SouthAfricahasahighlydevelopedfinancialsector,butontheotherhand,thereisstilla
      highly marginalized, poor and overwhelmingly Black section of the economy (Habib
      2004, 92). South Africa’s strategy was relying on neoliberal policies to stabilize the
      economy, but it did not resolve the micro-economic problems such as job creation and
      unskilledlabour(Ajam&Aron2007,771).ThisisproofthatSouthAfrica’sapproachto
      addressthecausesofpovertyisaffectingtheprospectsofthepoortoaccessinfrastructure
      and jobs (Ghosh 2011, 854). The Apartheid picture of inequality, declining investment
      and rising unemployment has not changed much under the post-Apartheid ANC gov-
      ernment except for the very select few who formed part of South Africa’s new ‘Black
      elite’ (Ashman, Fine & Newman 2011, 186–187).          
        Theformationandincorporationofa‘Blackcapitalistclass’wasaveryimportantpart
      of the new South Africa that was formed in 1994. This new ‘Black bourgeoisie’ was
      initially formed out of former trade union leaders and political activists but was highly
      financedfromvarioussectorswhilealsobeingheavilydependentonthestate.Although
      this was very important and a great achievement for South Africa, the majority of the
      ownershipovertheeconomywasstillpredominantlyWhite(Ashman,Fine&Newman
      2011, 187). Some argue that the creation of the ‘Black capitalist elite’ through Black
      EconomicEmpowerment(BEE)hasonlymadechangesintermsofBlackrepresentation,
      but not much has changed in terms of White dominated corporate structures (Makgetla
      2004,279).Furthermore,thestrategicempowermentofasmallBlackelitefurtheredthe
      business interests of national and international institutions while progressing and es-
      tablishing the neoliberal ideals amongst the ANC leadership during the crucial years
      directly before and after Apartheid (Bond 2000, 39–40; Jara 2013, 269). Therefore, in
      broad terms, the development of Black capital without destabilizing the predominantly
      White financial sector remains a difficult yet very important task for the South African
      government. The integration of the economy is an issue of growing importance for the
      SouthAfricanpublicasreflectedinmovementssuchas#feesmustfallandthedebateon
      land reform (Sands 2018; Mpofu 2017).                  
        Furthermore,evenlocalandinternationaleconomistsandpoliticalleaderswhoagreed
      thatthenewSouthAfricawouldbenefitfromademocraticsocialistgovernmentargued
      fiercely for the preservation of a free market system. The main argument was that
      neoliberal economic policies implied the efficacy of market instruments that could
      function as a redistribution strategy and therefore limit government intervention.

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         833     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      However, free markets could also inhibit racism through free and fair competition and
      allow for integration into the South African economy. Competition within neoliberal
      capitalismwouldthereforerestraindiscrimination(Schneider2003,32).Schneider(2003,
      32–33) does point out that this does not take into account other factors that have a
      significantinfluenceonsocio-economicconditionsinSouthAfrica.Someofthesefactors
      includeshorterlifeexpectancy,lowerratesofliteracyandhighratesofinfantmortality.
      Thesesocio-economicconditionsarestructurallyandsystematicallybuiltintotheSouth
      AfricanstateandeconomyandhavebeenusedtobenefittheWhiteminority.Therefore,
      some sort ofregulation isnecessarytoensure thefair distribution andintegration ofall
      members into the South African economy (Schneider 2003, 33).
                                                             
      The business community, the World Bank and the International
      Monetary Fund                                          
                                                             
      The predominant view on why the ANC adopted some characteristics of the neoliberal
      orthodoxy was that international institutions such as the WB and the IMF had great
      influence on the ANC and its policy making (Narsiah 2002, 30). The international
      communitybecamemoreawareandconcernedwiththeimmanentpoliticalshiftswithin
      South Africa during the 1980s. International institutions such as the WB and the IMF
      reachedouttolendSouthAfricaan‘invisible’helpinghandforthetransitionperiodthat
      lay ahead. The WB and the IMF encouraged South Africa to take on neoliberal, non-
      interventionalistpolicies.Thebusinesscommunity,bothnationallyandabroad,cameto
      the realization that South Africa would soon become a democracy under ANC rule.
      Consequently,theystartedsupportingtheANCandtheupcomingdemocracy.However,
      they also realized that they would have to intervene in the ANC’s plans to prevent the
      ANCfromnationalizingSouthAfricanBanksandindustries(Peet2002,71).Duringthe
      1980stheANCneededandwelcomedthesupportofthebusinesscommunity,thinking
      that it would strengthen their cause against the opposition and end the oppression of
      Apartheid sooner (Macozoma 2003, 16).                  
        Duringtheearly1990stheWBwasextremelyinvolvedinSouthAfricanpolitics.The
      WB would make regular ‘missions’ to South Africa and during these missions ANC
      researchers and policy leaders were of ‘particular interest’ to them. ANC leaders and
      officialswerealsoofteninvitedoverseasfortrainingoneconomicpolicymattersbythe
      WB and the IMF (Narsiah 2002, 30; Peet 2002, 71). These missions were frequently
      referredtoaspartofa‘trust-building’processthatwouldalignthevaluesofANCleftists
      withtheWBandIMFrepresentatives.Thisapproachwasveryeffective.ANCleadersand
      keyfigureswhosupportedthenationalizationofSouthAfricanbanksandindustriesnow
      questionedwhethernationalizationwasadefiningpolicyoftheANC(Peet2002,71–73).
      Itisnowapparentthatduringtheearly1990s,theANCwaslookingforpolicyalternatives
      ‘suchasantitrustlegislationandgovernment-appointeddirectorsontheboardsofmajor
      companies’ (Peet 2002, 71). The WB’s influence can be seen in the ANC’s somewhat
      dramatic changes during the 1990s. The WB’s network of policy initiatives ‘paid div-
      idendswhentheANCassumedpowerin1994’(Narsiah2002,30).Thegreatsurpriseis
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      834                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      notnecessarilythattheANCconvertedtoneoliberaleconomicpolicy,butthespeedand
      efficacy with which they did (Peet 2002, 73).          
        Moreover,whilethepoliticalandeconomicpressuresweremountingontheANCto
      converttoneoliberaleconomicpolicy,itsownmemberswerebecomingmoreandmore
      persuadedbytheongoingdebatesandprinciplesofneoliberalism(Gumede2005,67,71).
      Firstly,highlyplacedmemberswithintheANC,suchasTitoMboweniandThaboMbeki,
      hold degrees in mainstream economics and their (more neoliberal) perspective had an
      influenceonpolicymaking(Schneider2018,309).Forsome,theacademicdiscourseand
      training programs of the WB and IMF were convincing enough to persuade them
      (Ashman,Fine&Newman2011,182).Otherswerepersuadedbyjoboffers,sharesand
      other assets that helped to shape the ‘new Black elite’ (Gumede 2005, 172).
        International incidents also contributed to the neoliberal persuasion. The fall of the
      BerlinWallandthecollapseoftheSovietUnionbroughtaboutacoldrealizationtothe
      members and leaders of the ANC (Peet 2002, 72). There was no good example of a
      communistcountryforSouthAfricatofollowandtheANCwasdependentonneoliberal
      countriesforhelp.MostoftheirromanticillusionsfadedandtheANCcametorealizethat
      they would have to take into account how the international community would react to
      nationaleconomicpolicy(Peet2002,72;Ashman,Fine&Newman2011,182).Forthe
      ANCleaders,itbecameabout‘politicalpracticality’and‘economicalrealism’(Peet2002,
      78).Theharshrealitywasthattheyhadtocommitthemselvestobetteringthelivesforthe
      majority ofSouthAfricans,nomatter whattheirownpersonalbeliefs were(Peet2002,
      78).Mostcommunistorsocialistcountrieswereconvertingtoneoliberalism.TheANC
      had no other international supporters or examples to follow and, with the growing
      economicandpoliticalpressuressurroundingthem,itiseasytounderstandwhytheANC
      converted to a neoliberal orthodoxy (Schneider 2018, 308).
        TheWBandtheIMFencouragedthisoutlookandpromptedANCleaderstowardsa
      macro-economic approach that would align with mainstream global economic policies
      (Bond2000,74–75).TheWBandtheIMFstressedtheimportanceofalleviatingpoverty
      through‘trickledowneconomics’byapplyingamacro-economicstrategythatfocusedon
      the concept of creating job opportunities within the private sector. A ‘secret letter of
      intent’wassignedbetweentheANCandtheIMFin1993,securingaloanofanestimated
      $850million(Schneider2018,309).Inthis‘secretletterofintent’,theIMFstipulatedthat
      theSouthAfricaneconomymustadheretothefollowingpolicies:‘cuttingstatedeficits,
      controlling inflation, imposing wage restraint, adopting outward orientation, and, most
      importantly, recognizing the superiority of market forces over state regulatory inter-
      ventions’ (Peet 2002, 72).                             
        Itwaswithstrategicinterest,andwitheconomicandpoliticalsignificance,thattheWB
      andtheIMFrepresentedneoliberalpoliciestoSouthAfrica.TheWBandtheIMFthen
      ensured the implementation of neoliberal policies as contingencies to lending financial
      supporttoSouthAfrica.TheIMFandtheWBevenmadeimplicitthreatsthattheywould
      withdraw financial support for the government if the ANC implemented social policies
      thatweretoogenerous(Schneider2018,309).Undertheguiseoffinancialsupportforthe
      newdemocraticmovementbothinternationalinstitutionsfastenedtheneoliberalgripon
      South Africa. With neoliberalism being the only picture of economic progression, the

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         835     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      ANC became more pressured within the international institutions to adapt to this eco-
      nomic system (Peet 2002, 78–79).                       
        Mainstream global economic policies were also heavily supported by the local
      business community in South Africa. It became increasingly clear to the local business
      andpoliticalcommunitythattheANCwasunpreparedwhenitcametothenegotiations
      concerningeconomicpoliciesandthattheirfocuswasmoreondiscoursesaroundpolitical
      liberation(Narsiah2002,31).Thelocalbusinesscommunityheldseveralworkshopsand
      intentionally narrowed the economic discourse on policy (Bond 2000, 74–75). These
      workshops included political leaders, academics, businesspeople, development consul-
      tantsandmanymore(Bond2000,74–75).AccordingtoSchneider(2018,309–310),the
      negotiationsandoutmanoeuvringincludedApartheidofficialsremaininginofficeduring
      thetransitionperiodtoensurethatneoliberalpolicies(GEAR)thatwerestartedbeforethe
      ANCassumedpowerwereproperlyimplemented.Someoftheseinstitutionsandoffices
      includedtheMinistryofFinance,theSouthAfricanReserveBank(SARB),theCentral
      Economic Advisory Services, as well as several other finance institutions and statistics
      agencies(Bond2000,75;Schneider2018,309–310).Thiswasbelievedtoshowcasethe
      successofasmallgroupofSouthAfricanandinternationaleconomistsfromtheSARB
      andtheWBworkingtogethertounderminetheprogressiveforcesoftheANC(Schneider
      2018, 310).                                            
        A dominant representative of the local business community was the Consultative
      Business Movement (CBM). The CBM was essential in finding common ground when
      negotiations tookplace between theANCandtheApartheid regime.AccordingtoPeet
      (2002,72),SouthAfricanbusinessinstitutionsarguedforamoderateormorepragmatic
      approach,ratherthananideologicalapproachtothechangeofeconomicpolicies.Local
      businesses such as Sanlam, an insurance company, and the South African Chamber of
      Business produced documents stating what they hoped a post-Apartheid South African
      economywouldentail.Allrecognizedtheneedforsocialreformbutarguedforlimited
      economicrestructuringandamacro-economic,outward-orientedeconomicapproachthat
      would promote free enterprise and would reduce poverty (Peet 2002, 72). Other large
      businesses,suchasthediamondminingcompanyAngloAmericanCorporation,reached
      out to ANC leaders during the 1980s and started promoting their business interests by
      persuadingtheANCleaderstodirecteconomicpolicytowardsneoliberalideology.Both
      Sanlam and the Anglo American Corporation were very persuasive due to the BEE
      programthatbeganinformallyin1992whichallowedthecorporationstotransferassets
      to selected members within the ANC and the Pan Africanist Congress leadership
      (Schneider 2018, 310).                                 
        IthasbecomeincreasinglyclearthatthelocalbusinesscommunityalongwiththeNP
      managedtheeconomicpolicynegotiationsanddiscoursetoachieveastrategicoutcome
      (Klein 2007, 202–203). When considering the international climate in which these
      discussionstookplace(1980s–1990s),nationalizationandsocialistidealsdidstrikefear
      intotheheartofthebusinesscommunityabouttheeconomicfutureofSouthAfrica(Peet
      2002,72).Duringthistime countriesof economicprosperity,suchas theUnited States
      and the United Kingdom, followed neoliberal economic policies. The leaders of these
      countries,suchasMargretThatcherandRonaldRegan,wereadvocatesforthisneoliberal

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      836                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      movement (Klein 2007, 199–200). Moreover, the neoliberal economic policies of
      prosperity were also communicated frequently and very effectively to South Africa in
      general by the international community during this period (Peet 2002, 66). Taking this
      intoaccount,neoliberalismdidseemlikearationalandpracticalsolutiontolocalbusiness
      andpoliticalleaders.Generally,itseemedthatthebusinesscommunitywasinvestedinthe
      neoliberalidealsofwealthdistributionandeconomicgrowththatwasledandfacilitated
      bythestatethroughprivativeenterprise(Peet2002,78–79).TheANC,beingpersuaded
      by the same arguments as the local business community, effectively agreed. After all,
      thesewereleadersofindustry,academicsandeconomicexpertsleadingthediscourseon
      thefutureoftheSouthAfricaneconomy,providingpersuasive,coherentandsophisticated
      arguments.                                             
        However, the ultimate persuasion lay within the greater geopolitical and economic
      context that left South Africa without an economic alternative, both practically and
      theoretically (Peet 2002, 79; Ashman, Fine & Newman 2011, 182). The economic re-
      structuringthatSouthAfricahadtofacerequiredrapideconomicgrowth,butwhatwas
      equally necessary was integration and welfare development. Of course, South Africa is
      notuniqueinthissenseandothercountrieshadtoobtainthesameresults,aswasthecase
      withTaiwan,SingaporeandSouthKorea(Cheru2002,508–509).However,SouthAfrica
      is in a contextuality unique situation where the majority of the population was under
      severe economic and political oppression. The neoliberal economic policies would re-
      quire that ‘free marketeers’ addressed these vast and racially charged injustices,
      something that no other country had experience with (Schneider 2003, 46). Schneider
      (2003,24)arguesthatearlydemocraticSouthAfricareplacedtheideologyofapartheid
      with the ideology of neoliberal capitalism which is only perpetuating inequality.
        Neoliberal economic theorists argue that for South Africa, radical and large-scale
      redistributionand integration isunattainableandispossiblydangerous.The stabilityof
      the South African economy relies on foreign direct investment, and redistribution pro-
      grams such as land reform would scare off the investors that South Africa desperately
      needstosupporteconomicgrowthanddevelopment.Furthermore,asitstands,theSouth
      African economy cannot support widespread distribution, the development of welfare
      programs and the expansion of basic services to all citizens (Schneider 2003, 24–25).
      Schneider (2003, 24–25) argues that these statements are all based on a ‘fundamental
      ideologyandnotonsubstantiveanalysis’thatinherentlytendtoignorethestructuraland
      systematic problems within a neoliberal economy which perpetuate inequality. Often
      economists lose sight of the practical and social implications in the blind pursuit of
      abstract and ‘narrowly defined economic goals and criteria’ (Schneider 2003, 25). The
      practicalandsocialimplicationscomeatgreatcosttothemajorityofthepopulationand
      resultineconomicinstability.TheneoliberaleconomicpolicieshavenotstabilizedSouth
      Africa’s economy or benefitted the Black majority (Schneider 2003, 25).
        Twenty-fiveyearsafterdemocracy,SouthAfrica’seconomicproblemswerenotsolved
      byneoliberalorthodoxpoliciesasmanypromisedtheywouldbe.However,theproblems
      facingSouthAfricaarefarmorecomplex.Theyalsoinvolveeconomicmismanagement
      (e.g. service delivery in local municipalities), corruption, political populism, global
      economicinfluences(e.g.tradewarsbetweentheUnitedStatesandChina),globalmarket

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         837     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      dynamics(e.g.commodityprices)andsoforth.Inmanyways,SouthAfricastillfacesthe
      samechallengesitdidwhentheANCcameintopower.Someofthesechallengesinclude
      unemployment,inequality,capitalflightandpoorincomegrowth(Schneider2018,313).
      TheNationalDevelopmentPlan(NDP),whichfocusedonrelievingpovertyandreducing
      inequality, was implemented in 2013. The NDP struggled and failed with real world
      policyimplementationduetoalackofgovernmentcapacityandpoliticalcapital(Fourie
      2017, 73). According to Fourie (2017, 73), policies like the NDP do not address other
      policiesthatarepreventingtheeconomyfromgrowingandSouthAfrica’scitizensfrom
      enhancing their well-being:                            
        ‘Businessesneedaccesstocapital,askilled(international)workforce,affordableand
      reliable electricity, good quality roads and rails, a safe working environment, a non-
      corruptjudiciary,theprotectionofprivatepropertyrightsandefficientandtransparenttax
      regulations,tradeagreements,borderpostsandothergovernmentredtape’.However,itis
      difficult to formulate these policies in a politically and socially unstable environment,
      especially when some of these policies are contradictory to the wishes of most South
      African citizens and when the government’s integrity is compromised.
        OtherproblemsthatSouthAfricaisfacingaremoreuniqueandofitsownmaking.The
      lackoflong-termpublicinvestmentininfrastructureduringandaftertheso-called‘lost
      decade’oftheJacobZumapresidencyisoneprevalentexample(TheWorldNews2020).
      The costly power failures that are due to lack of maintenance of infrastructure and
      maladministrationofEskomhassurelyhadanegativeeffectonprivatesectorinvestment.
      OtherState-OwnedEnterprisessuchasSouthAfricanAirways,thenationalcarrier,also
      requirefrequentbailoutsduetomaladministrationandlackofstrictmaintenance,notto
      mention the frequent service delivery protests that point to government’s inability to
      provide basic services and that show the lack of real economic transformation (Fourie
      2017, 64–65).                                          
        Furthermore,thesocio-politicalclimateinSouthAfricadidnotimproveduetothestill
      existing racially charged inequality. Schneider (2018, 313) states that the ANC ‘trans-
      formed from fighter of oppression to oppressor’ after the Marikana Massacre of 2012.
      Distrust in the ANC grew deeper due to corruption and state capture during the Jacob
      ZumaPresidencyof2009–2017,whichdramaticallyescalatedSouthAfrica’seconomic
      problems and created scepticism with foreign investors (Desai 2018, 499–513). Today,
      PresidentCyrilRamaphosamustfindabalancebetweenprotectingtherightsofprivate
      property,butalsoconsideringtheoutcryforsomeformoflandredistributionfrommany
      SouthAfricans.Ifdoneequitably,executedwithprecision,andwithintheboundariesof
      international law, land reform in South Africa could promote economic stability and
      reflectstrongethicalleadershiptotheinternationalcommunity(Kwarteng&Botchway
      2019,98).Nonetheless,highergrowthratesandeconomicdevelopmentarenecessaryto
      create the South Africa that was promised in 1994.     
      Conclusion                                             
      Early democratic South Africa has persistent neoliberal tendencies despite social pro-
      grams and government intervention being central to overcoming economic inequality.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      838                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      Foucaultidentifiedtwomainformsorhistoricalcontextsofneoliberalism(Foucaultetal.
      2008,84;Hardin2014,206–207):Firstly,theGermanordo-liberalismthatoriginatedasa
      critiqueoftheNazistateandsecondly,theAmericanneoliberalismthatoriginatedfrom
      critiqueofKeynesianismandtheNewDeal.Theformermadeuseofmarketsystemsto
      supervisethestate(Foucaultetal.2008,116).Thelatterdevelopedapoliticalrationality
      whereeconomicanalysisisusedandappliedtonon-marketphenomenaandrelationships
      (Hardin2014,207;Foucaultetal.2008,240).Bothformswereimportantinthefounding
      and legitimization of the state (Hardin 2014, 206–207; Foucault et al. 2008, 217–219).
      Within the context of post-Apartheid South Africa, both forms of neoliberalism were
      apparent in the legitimization of the state.           
        Neoliberal economic policies were adopted in South Africa after the rule of the
      Apartheidregime,justastheGermanformwasadoptedaftertheNaziregime.Itisalso
      interesting tonotethatSouthAfrica’sinitialeconomic policy,theRDP,althoughitwas
      neverfullyimplemented,was basedonaKeynesian welfare system justastheGerman
      ordo-liberalismwasbasedonKeynesianpolicy(Hardin2014,206).However,themore
      aggressiveGEARpolicieswereimplementedasareactiontotheKeynesianRDPwelfare
      policies, like theAmerican form of neoliberalism. Moreover,neoliberals also arguedto
      limit state interest groups that would use political power for group interests (Schneider
      2003,33).DuringtheApartheideratheNPwouldusepoliticalpowertoensureeconomic
      wealth to the White minority in South Africa. The fear was that under the ANC gov-
      ernment something similar would happen in the form of various tribal interests. Neo-
      liberals arguedthat certain policies could beputinto place that wouldhelp prevent this
      fromhappeningbylimitingstateinterventionanddependingonfreemarketsystemsfor
      integrationandredistribution(Schneider2003,33).Furthermore,neoliberalpolicieswere
      also argued to inhibit racism through free market competition and would result in
      economicintegrationandequalitywithlimitedstateintervention(Schneider2003,33).In
      otherwords,inpost-ApartheidSouthAfrica,bothformsofneoliberalismareapparentin
      thestrictlimitationofstateinterestgroupsandconstantsupervisionofthestate,butalsoin
      thestrongoppositiontoKeynesianpoliciesoranyformofwelfaredistributionthatisnot
      done through market allocation.                        
        However,thishaschangedinsomewaysandpersistedinotherways.Therearesome
      elements to South African policy that deviate from neoliberal characteristics that were
      accomplished through a great amount of government intervention. During 2014–
      2015 government allocated an additional 11% of its spending to social expenditures.
      South African economic policies also include BEE or Broad Based Black Economic
      Empowerment (BBBEE) (Nattrass 2014, 67). However, due to these policies’ ties with
      powerful trade unions and labour legislation, these policies are implemented inconsis-
      tently. Consequently, they have had limited impact on relieving the levels of inequality
      andunemployment(Nattrass2014,67).Theunionsandlegislation,whileverystricton
      minimum wages, do not take into consideration the tariffs on imported goods. Higher
      costsandinternationalcompetitionforSouthAfricanbusinessesunfortunatelycontribute
      tohigherunemploymentrates(Nattrass2014,67).Theincorporationofthe‘Blackelite’
      intotheSouthAfricaneconomyisnecessary,butregrettablyithasledtoaverycentralized
      group of people having control over a large sum of the South African economy. The

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         839     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      inability of these centralized groups to coordinate between the private sector and the
      publicsector,oragreeoneconomicdevelopmentstrategies,limitsnationaldevelopment
      andleadstoinequalityandcorruption(Nolke&Claar2013,45–50).Thisseverelylimits
      thegovernment’sabilitytonotonlygrowanddevelopthecounty’seconomybutalsoto
      look after its citizens as it promised to do in 1994.  
        InHarvey’sdefinitionofneoliberalism,hestatesthatfirstandforemostneoliberalism
      is a theory of political and economic practices that equates the advancement of human
      well-being,individualandotherwise,toeconomicadvancement.Economicadvancement
      can be achieved through institutional frameworks that support and protect private
      property rights, free markets and free trade. Moreover, minimum state intervention is
      preferablesinceinterferencecandistortmarketsandinterestgroupswillintervenetouse
      themarketsfortheirownbenefit(Harvey2005,2).TheANCwerepersuadedtoconvert
      to neoliberal policies of privatization and the deregulation of markets to attract foreign
      investment that would result in economic growth and the overall well-being of South
      Africancitizens(Peet2002,72;Klein2007,202–203).WithinthefirstfewyearsofANC
      government rule there were not many development programs and very little state in-
      tervention. The WB and the IMF warned the ANC not to implement too many social
      welfare programs and to rather rely on the ‘trickle down effects’ of the free market
      (Schneider 2018, 309). However, this has changed over recent years, although the un-
      employment and inequality statistics remain high (Schneider 2018, 311). Within the
      specific circumstances of South Africa being a developing economic and industrial
      country ‘[t]he consequence is that those at the bottom of the income distribution are
      locked into a system that limits their opportunities for upward social mobility’ (Fourie
      2017, 68).                                             
        Aneoliberalsocietyismuchmorefocusedoneconomicandfinancialdevelopment.By
      adopting neoliberal policies, SouthAfrica focused more onthe greater accumulation of
      national wealth which resulted in class compromises where the wealthier classes of
      society benefitted. Moreover, Harvey (2005, 22, 119, 160–164) argues that the great
      influencewithinneoliberalismisnotthestate,butthepowerfulcorporatesectorsthathave
      asignificantinfluenceonthestate.NocountrycanattesttothismorethanSouthAfrica.
      Business organizations were strategic in their negotiations with the ANC in the period
      leadinguptoandshortlyafterthedemocraticelectionsin1994(Peet2002,78).Boththe
      internationalandthelocalbusinesscommunity,duetomanyfactorsincludinglocaland
      global politics, self-interest, and partly because they believed it would lead to the well-
      being of all South Africans, negotiated for a neoliberal conversion (Peet 2002, 82–83).
        Theeffectofthesecompromisesinpost-ApartheidSouthAfricaisthattheeconomyis
      still dominated by White ownership ‘in conjunction with allies in the new black elite’
      (Schneider 2018, 316). The result is increased racial and cultural tension, despite a
      common interest amongst all South Africans for national growth and development
      (Schneider 2018, 316). The concept of land redistribution is also causing increased
      tension amongst South African citizens and within the international community. Many
      neoliberalsbelievethatSouthAfricashouldupholdtheidealsofprivatepropertyrights
      (Kwatreng&Botchway2019,98).However,themajorityofSouthAfricansarelooking
      to ANC leadership for social justice and some form of economic stability (Schneider

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      840                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
      2018,321).Itstillseemsthatthereactionoftheinternationalandbusinesscommunityis
      of great concern to the ANC government.                
        The ANC government, through the implementation of policies and practices on
      different levelsofsociety, isconstructingandpursuinga neoliberal political rationality.
      Brown’sfirstcriterionforidentifyingneoliberalstatesisthatthestateopenlyrespondsto
      theneedsofthemarketthroughtheimplementationofeconomicpoliciesthatsustainand
      fostermarketsystems(Brown2005,41–42).Theneoliberalistconstructivismprojectcan
      beseenintheeconomicpoliciesofpost-ApartheidSouthAfricaofwhichGEARwasthe
      pivotal point (Schneider 2018, 310). The implementation of neoliberal policies such as
      GEAR would mean the securing and sustaining of market systems. Moreover, in the
      beginning, the BEE program benefitted many conglomerates and a select group of
      politically connected individuals. These types of programs and policies that benefit the
      wealthy often incentivize wealthy individuals, businesses and government to keep
      pursuing the neoliberal political rationality (Brown 2005, 40–41). The building of the
      GautrainisanexampleofhowtheBEEprogram,althoughBlackrepresentative,stillonly
      benefitsaselectgroupofBlackelites,internationalconglomeratesand,essentially,White
      capital(Ashman,FineandNewman2011,188).Thecreationofa‘Blackelite’createdthe
      impression of a successful integration of the economy and a successful, legitimate and
      democratic state. As stated by Hart and Padayachee (2013, 76):
        The impact of policy is greater if we look beyond direct ownership and control. The
        beneficiariesofBEEareasmallelite,manywithcloselinkstotherulingparty,someofthem
        party officials, plus a few prominent ex-trade unionists. Most became wealthy through
        boardroom deals and none has started a large new business. Self-enrichment rather than
        empowerment is theorder ofthe day.                   
        The affirmative action policies of government should benefit the most vulnerable of
      society and not enrich private enterprise or well-placed (well-related) public officials.
      BEE,asasolutiontoeconomicinequality,isoftenviewedasperpetuatingtheneoliberal
      ideologybypresentingthe‘self-as-commodity’andasthe‘onlypossiblewayforthepoor
      toraisethemselvesoutofpoverty’(Gibson2011,64).Moreover,fromtheneoliberallens,
      BEEisalsodismissedasan‘olddisclosureofclasspolitics,andthepoorareunderstood
      simply as people who need to find ways to become entrepreneurs, responsible for their
      ownself-exploitationashumancapital’(Gibson2011,64).Therealityofthematteristhat
      economic inequality is something that affects the majority of South Africans daily and
      BEEistheonlypolicythataddressestheinequalitythatwassystematizedinApartheidera
      South Africa (Chipkin 2007, 173–187; Gibson 2011, 64). 
        Brown’s second criterion is that a neoliberal state makes decisions based on a cost–
      benefit analysis (Brown 2005, 42). The mere fact that the ANC took into consideration
      internationalinstitutionsandlocalbusiness’reactionstothenationalizationofbanksand
      other South African industries and then decided to convert to neoliberal orthodoxy is
      explanation enough (Peet 2002, 71). However, the cost–benefit analysis is seen
      throughouttheANC’sdecision-makingprocess,suchasthroughtheabandonmentofthe
      RDP in favour of GEAR (Peet 2002, 71–72), the limitation on social development
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         841     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      programs when the IMF threatened to retract funding (Schneider 2018, 309) and, more
      recently, taking into consideration the reaction of the business community to land dis-
      tribution (Schneider 2018, 321). Difficult socio-political matters in South Africa are
      usually also linked to the economic growth and therefore matters quickly become seen
      through entrepreneurial lenses.                        
        Lastly, Brown states that a neoliberal state has the sole function or responsibility to
      ensuretheproperfunctioningoftheeconomicsystem(Brown2005,42).Inotherwords,
      thestatenolongerfunctionsasanagentofitscitizens,butratherasanagentofthemarket
      systems.Thisalignswiththefirsttwocriteria,becausethestaterespondstotheneedsof
      themarket,asitwouldforitscitizens,andthestateactswithincost–benefitanalysisand
      not for the well-being of its citizens (Brown 2005, 42). This once again also links to
      Foucault’s concept of governmentality and Harvey’s definition of neoliberalism. Post-
      Apartheid South Africa does embody the characteristics of neoliberalism in this sense.
      One example is the Marikana Massacre of 2012, where protesting miners were shot on
      orders of the government. This is an example of how social and political discourse has
      become individualized through neoliberal hegemony.     
        Gibson(2011,65)presentsthenotionthatneoliberalismsilencespublicdiscourseby
      strippingawaythenotionof‘blacksolidarityinfavorofegoisticself-advancement’.He
      argues that embracing the morality of neoliberalism has caused fragmentation and fear
      that‘expressesapoliticsofresentment’(Gibson 2011,65).He goesontostatethat the
      ‘economicempowermentbased onethnicentrepreneurialism,istheriseofxenophobia,
      whichisproducedbythedeterioratingsituationforthepoorandaidedbytherecentturn
      towards ethnic populism within the ANC’ (Gibson 2011, 65). The post-Apartheid
      government embraced neoliberal morality that seeks self-advancement which encour-
      ages fragmentation and, more recently, justifies acts of corruption and state capture
      (Schneider 2018, 313; Desai, 2018, 499–513).           
        TheseneoliberaleconomicpolicieswereinstarkcontrasttotheearlierMarxistpolicies
      oftheANC.Itbecameclearthattheexternalinfluences,suchasthebusinesscommunity,
      the WB and the IMF, had a big role to play in this shift. Consequently, South African
      society also adopted the neoliberal political rationality that was reflected in political
      decision-making and institutionalized through policies and other socio-political struc-
      tures. The adoption of these neoliberal socio-economic policies has not had the desired
      effectsincombatingeconomicinequalitywhichpersiststothisday.Instead,Iarguethat
      the adoption of these neoliberal policies has escalated economic inequality and not
      enoughdistributionofresourcesormeaningfulsocialsupportwasprovidedtoaddressthe
      escalating economic inequality in South Africa.        
      ORCID iD                                               
      DanelleFouriehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8945-3422    
      Notes                                                  
      1. Foucault understood governmentality as a conjunction of elements, including ‘sovereignty,
        discipline, and governmental management, which has population as its main target and
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      842                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(5)
                                                             
                                                             
        apparatusesofsecurityhasitsessentialmechanisms’(Foucaultetal.2007,107–108).Foucault
        lateraddedothercomponentstogovernmentality,namely,‘self-limitationofgovernmentreason’.
      2. A neoliberal political rationality develops from the concept of governmentality that extends
        marketvaluestoallsocialinstitutionsandpeopleadaptthisrationalitytoaspectsofeveryday
        life. Wendy Brown argues that this political rationality becomes the defining point of the
        neoliberal turn (Brown 2005,40). Consequently, the neoliberal rationality legitimizes and en-
        couragesaquantitative approachto well-being thatemphasizes material affluence.
      3. PhilipMirowski(2009,421)arguedthatHarveyshouldmakeamoredistinctdifferencebetween
        theconceptofneoliberalismandneoclassicaleconomictheoryandthathewasconflatingthetwo
        concepts;insodoing,Harveywasnotgivinganaccurateinterpretationofhowsocietyfunctions
        within neoclassical theory.                          
      References                                             
      Ajam, T., and A. Janine 2007. “Fiscal Renaissance in a Democratic South Africa.” Journal of
         AfricanEconomies16(5): 745–781.                     
      Ashman, S., B. Fine, and S. Newman 2011. “The Crisis in South Africa: Neoliberalism, Finan-
         cializationandUnevenandCombinedDevelopment.”SocialistRegister:TheCrisisinThis
         Time47(1): 174–195.                                 
      Bond,P.2000.Elitetransition:FromApartheidtoNeoliberalisminSouthAfrica.London:Pluto
         Press.                                              
      Brown,W.2005.Edgework:Criticalessaysonknowledgeandpolitics.NJ:PrincetonUniversity
         Press.                                              
      Cheru,F.2001.“Overcomingapartheid’slegacy:TheascendancyofneoliberalisminSouthAfrica’s
         anti-poverty strategy.”ThirdWorld Quarterly22(4): 505–527.
      Chipkin, I. 2007. Do South Africans Exist? In Nationalism, Democracy and the Identity of the
         People.Johannesburg:Witwatersrand University Press. 
      Davies,W.2014.Thelimitsofneoliberalism:Authority,sovereigntyandthelogicofcompetition.
         London:Sage.                                        
      Desai, A. 2018. “The Zuma Moment: Between Tender-based Capitalists and Radical Economic
         Transformation.”Journal of Contemporary AfricanStudies 364:499–513.
      Feigenbaum,H.,J.Henig,andC.Hamnett1998.Shrinkingthestate:Thepoliticalunderpinningsof
         privatization. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
      Foucault, M., M. Senellart, and C. De France 2008. “The Birth of Biopolitics”. Lecture at the
         CollègedeFrance,1978-1979.Basingstoke/New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
      Foucault,M.,M.Senellart,andCDeFrance2007.Security,territory,population.InLectureatthe
         CollègedeFrance,1978-1979.Basingstoke/New York:Palgrave Macmillan.
      Fourie,J.2017.“TheLongWalktoEconomicFreedomAfterApartheid,andtheRoadAhead.”
         Journal forContemporary History 42(1): 59–80.       
      Gibson,N.C.2011.FanonianpracticesinSouthArica:FromSteveBikotoAbahlalibaseMjondolo.
         Scottsville: University of KwaZulu-Natal Press.     
      Ghosh,J.2011.“Dealing with ’The Poor’.”DevelopmentandChange 42(3): 849–858.
      GovernmentofSouthAfrica1998.PovertyandInequalityinSouthAfrica.Pretoria:Officeofthe
         DeputyVice President.                               
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
      Fourie                                         843     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Gumede,W.M.2005.ThaboMbekiandtheBattlefortheSouloftheANC.CapeTown:ZebraPress.
      Habib, A. 2004. “The Politics of Economic Policy-making: Substantive Uncertainty, Political
         Leverage, and Human Development.” Transformation: Critical Perspectives on Southern
         Africa 56(1):90–103.                                
      Hardin, C.2014. “Finding the ’Neo’in Neoliberalism.”Cultural Studies28(2): 199–221.
      Hart,K.,andV.Padayachee2013.“AHistoryofSouthAfricanCapitalisminNationalandGlobal
         Perspective.”Transformation: Critical Perspectives onSouthernAfrica 81(82): 55–85.
      Harvey,D.2005.A Brief History ofNeoliberalism. NY:Oxford University Press.
      Jara,M.K.2013.“CriticalReflectionsontheCrisisandLimitsofANC‘Marxism.”.InMarxismin
         the21stCentury.Williams,M.,andV.p.Satgar,eds,67–96.Johannesburg:WitsUniversity
         Press.                                              
      Klein,N.2007.TheShockDoctrine:TheRiseofDisasterCapitalism.London:PenguinBooksLtd
      Kwarteng, A. H., and T. P. Botchway 2019. “State Responsibility and the Question of Expro-
         priation: A Preliminary to the“Land Expropriation without Compensation” Policy in South
         Africa.”Journal of PoliticsandLaw 121:98–107.       
      Macozoma,S.2003.“FromaTheoryofRevolutiontotheManagementofaFragileState.”TheReal
         State ofa Nation: South Africa After 4 (3):11–30.   
      Makgetla,N.S.2004.“ThePost-ApartheidEconomy.”Review ofAfricanPoliticalEconomy31
         (100): 263–281.                                     
      Marais,H.2011.South Africa Pushed tothe Limit.London:Zed Books.
      Mpofu,B.2017.“TheUrbanLandQuestion,LandReformandtheSpectreofExtrajudicialLand
         Occupations inSouthAfrica.”Africa Insight46(6): 96–111.
      Nattrass,N.2014.“ASouthAfricanVarietyofCapitalism?”NewPoliticalEconomy19(1):56–78.
      Narsiah,S.2002.“NeoliberalismandtheprivatisationofSouthAfrica.”GeoJournal571:29–38.
         Retrievedfrom Feb23, 2018.http://www.jstor.org/stable/41147695.
      No¨lke,A.,andS.Claar2013.“VarietiesofCapitalisminEmergingEconomies.”Transformation:
         CriticalPerspectives onSouthernAfrica 81(1): 33–54. 
      Peet,R.2002.“Ideology,Discourse,andtheGeographyofHegemony:FromSocialisttoNeoliberal
         Development inPostapartheid SouthAfrica.”Antipode34(1): 54–84.
      Sands,J.D.2018.“Whyreadthewest?MessianicityandCanonicitywithinaPostcolonial,South
         African Context.” In Who is an African? Engagement with Issues of Race, Afro-Ancestry,
         IdentityandDestinywithintheSouth.Hewitt,R.R.,andC.J.Kaunda,eds,275–287.Context
         Minneapolis:Fortress AcademicPress.                 
      Schneider,G.E. 2018. “The Post-Apartheid Development Debacle in South Africa: HowMain-
         stream Economics and the Vested Interests Preserved Apartheid Economic Structures.”
         Journal ofEconomic Issues52(2): 302–322.            
      Schneider,G.2003.“NeoliberalismandEconomicJusticeinSouthAfrica:RevisitingtheDebateon
         EconomicApartheid.”Review ofSocial Economy61(1): 23–50.
      Southall, R. 2013. “Realism and Neoliberalism: Marco-Economic Policy in South Africa.”.
         Liberation movements in power: Party & state in Southern Africa. Curry, J. p., ed, 88–96.
         Pietermaritzburg:University ofKwaZulu NatalPress.   
      The World News 2020. SA’s Lost Decade and How to Fix it. World News Platform https://
         theworldnews.net/za-news/sa-s-lost-decade-and-how-to-fix-it Dateof accessAug 2,2020.
                                                             