[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2025,Vol.51(10)1703–1729
      Antonio  Negri, Spinoza,  Marx,                        
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2025   
      and  Digital Capitalism                                
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
                                         sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537241308108
                                         journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Christian Fuchs                                       
      PaderbornUniversity,Germany                            
      Abstract                                               
      This paper asks: How can Spinoza help us to better understand digital capitalism? The
      articleengagescriticallyandconstructivelywiththephilosophiesofSpinoza,Marx,Hegel,
      and Antonio Negri in order to combine elements from their works. It focuses on a
      particular aspectofdigitalcapitalism,namelytheantagonismbetweendigitallabourand
      digitalcapital.Spinozadidnotdirectlyanalyseclassrelations.Nonetheless,hisphilosophy
      can help us to indirectly analyse contemporary capitalism. This paper undertakes an
      analysisofdigitalcapitalismbytakingSpinoza’sconceptsofpoweraspotentiaandpotestas
      asastartingpoint.AntonioNegrihasstressedthedialecticofpotentiaandpotestasaspart
      oftheanalysisofclassandcapitalism.ThispaperconnectsSpinozatoMarx’sandNegri’s
      analyses of capitalism and the working class. It analyses digital capitalism’s antagonisms
      betweendigitallabouranddigitalcapital,digitalcommoditiesanddigitalcommons,andthe
      networked digital productive forces and the digital relations of production as the an-
      tagonism between digital potentia and digital potestas.
      Keywords                                               
      Spinoza, Marx, Antonio Negri, digital capitalism, digital labour, digital potentia, digital
      potestas, digital power, immaterial labour, potestas, potentia, working class
                                                             
                                                             
      I Introduction                                         
                                                             
      ThispaperaskshowselectedaspectsofSpinoza’sworkscanhelpustobetterunderstand
      digitalcapitalism.TalkingaboutcapitalismrequiresustotakeaMarxistperspectiveand
      to link Spinoza to Marx. In Marxist theory, Antoni Negri is the major theorist who has
      beeninspiredbybothSpinozaandMarxandhasbasedonthesefoundationscontributed
      totheanalysisofcommunicationandthedigitalincapitalismbyestablishingandfurther
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      ChristianFuchs,PaderbornUniversity,WarburgerStr100,Paderborn33098,Germany.
      Email:christian.fuchs@uni-paderborn.de                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1704                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      developingcategoriessuchasthegeneralintellect,immateriallabour,theinformatisation
      and postmodernisation of production, and cognitive capitalism. In Marxist theory and
      philosophy,thereisingeneralnotmuchfocusontheanalysisofthedigitalinsocietyand
      capitalism. Rather, there is much more focus on other important topics such as crisis
      dynamics,financialisation,neoliberalism,classanalysis,etc.withouttouchingonissues
      havingtodowiththemediaanddigitaltechnologies.Negri’sworksandtheworksheco-
      authored together with Michael Hardt are an exception to the rule as they integrate
      analyses of information, communication, and the digital into the analysis of capitalism.
        Given Negri’s importance for a Marxist–Spinozist analysis of digital and commu-
      nicative capitalism, this paper draws particularly on Antoni Negri’s Spinoza interpre-
      tation.ThearticleengagescriticallyandconstructivelywithbothSpinoza’sandAntonio
      Negri’s works in order to reflect on the question: How can Spinoza help us to better
      understanddigitalcapitalism?HardtandNegri’sworksconstituteaprominentandwidely
      readSpinoza-inspiredphilosophicalapproach,whichjustifiesthatparticularattentionis
      given to them.                                         
        This paper gives particular attention to one important aspect of digital capitalism,
      namely the antagonism between digital labour and digital capital. This means that its
      focus is on class in digital capitalism. There is a multitude of phenomena that make up
      digital capitalism. The work at hand can only focus on a selected dimension, without
      claimingthattheantagonismbetweendigitallabouranddigitalcapitalistheonlyaspect
      of digital capitalism that requires analysis.          
        The paper proceeds in the following methodological manner. It starts with a more
      general discussion, namely an analysis of how Marxist authors have used Spinoza to
      analysecommunication.Thisanalysisshowsthatthusfarlittlefocushasbeengiventothe
      Spinozistanalysisofcommunicationincapitalism.Therestofthepapertriestocontribute
      toovercomingthisknowledgegapbyengagingwithbothSpinoza’sandNegri’sworks.
      Todoso,wefocus onthenotionofpowerinsection3.AreadingofbothSpinozaand
      Negri suggests that Spinoza’s notion of power as potentia and potestas is an important
      startingpointfortheanalysisofcommunicationincapitalismanddigitalcapitalism.We
      know from Marx that there is no capitalism without capital’s exploitation of surplus-
      value-generating labour. Labour-power is the heart of capitalism as it produces capital.
      Therefore,Marxwritesthatcapitalexists‘onlyinconnectionwith’labouras‘not-capital’
      (Marx 1857/1858, 274) that is ‘the living source of value’ (296). Advancing from the
      abstracttotheconcrete,theanalysisthereforeproceedswithafocusonlabour-powerand
      the relationship of labour and power in the capitalist economy (section 4). Further
      concretisingtheanalysis,wefocusontherelationshipbetweenlabourinpowerindigital
      capitalism’seconomy).Thetherebyadvancedanalysisofdigitalcapitalismisbasedona
      combinationofSpinoza,Marx,andNegri.Theanalysisofdigitalcapitalismisconducted
      in three steps organised in three sections: the class relation between digital capital and
      digitallabourisanalysedintermsofdigitalpotestasanddigitalpotentia(section5),the
      notionofimmateriallabouriscriticallyexamined(section6),andtheantagonismbetween
      the productive forces and the relations of production is set in the context of digital
      capitalism(section7).Whatholdsthesethreesectionstogetheristhecombinedfocuson
      theantagonismbetweendigitalpotestasanddigitalpotentia.Finally,someconclusions

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1705     
                                                             
                                                             
      aredrawn(section8).Thepaperstartswiththemostgeneralaspectsandproceedstomore
      concrete ones.Thismeans thatit followstheepistemologicalmethodthat Marx termed
      theadvancementfromtheabstracttotheconcrete.ForMarx,theadvancementfromthe
      abstracttotheconcreteisPoliticalEconomy’smethod(see(Marx1857/1858,100–108).
      He argues that the concrete ‘is concrete because it is the concentration of many deter-
      minations,henceunityofthediverse’(Marx1857/1858,101).Inordertoanalysedigital
      capitalismasaconcretecontemporaryorganisationalformofthecapitalistformationof
      societyandthecapitalistmodeofproduction,weneedtoadvancefromSpinozaviaMarx
      to Negri and from power to labour-power and digital labour.
        ThenovelaspectoftheapproachtakeninthispaperisthatitthinkstogetherSpinoza,
      Marx, and Negri in order to analyse the class relationship between digital capital and
      digital labour as a power relationship that involves both digital potentia and digital
      potestas. These are categories that have not been introduced in other works.
        Thispaperisatheorypaper,whichmeansthatitusestheoryconstructionasamethod.
      My understanding of theory uses dialectical philosophy as a method and epistemology.
      Specifically, this means that I engage with previous works by other authors that are
      relevant to the discussed topics, work through them, and conduct a philosophical Auf-
      hebung (sublation) of these works. Aufhebung as a dialectical method includes the
      elimination of knowledge (Aufhebung as Eliminierung), the preservation of knowledge
      (AufhebungasBewahrung),andtheupliftingofknowledgetoanewlevel(Aufhebungas
      Ho¨herheben).                                          
        In the Science of Logic, Hegel outlines the rich meanings of the term Aufhebung:
        “Tosublate[Aufheben]andbeingsublated[dasAufgehobene](theidealized[dasIdeelle])
        constitute one of the most important concepts of philosophy. It is a fundamental determi-
        nationthatrepeatedlyoccurseverywhereinit,themeaningofwhichmustbegraspedwith
        precisionandespeciallydistinguishedfromnothing.–Whatissublateddoesnottherebyturn
        into nothing. Nothing is the immediate; something sublated is on the contrary something
        mediated;itissomethingnon-existentbutasaresultthathasproceededfromabeing;itstill
        hasinitself,therefore,thedeterminatenessfromwhichitderives.TheGerman‘aufheben’
        (‘tosublate’inEnglish)hasatwofoldmeaninginthelanguage:itequallymeans‘tokeep,’‘to
        preserve,’and‘tocausetocease,’‘toputanendto.’Even‘topreserve’alreadyincludesa
        negativenote,namelythatsomething,inordertoberetained,isremovedfromitsimmediacy
        andhencefromanexistencewhichisopentoexternalinfluences.–Thatwhichissublatedis
        thussomethingatthesametimepreserved,somethingthathaslostitsimmediacybuthasnot
        cometonothingforthat.–Thesetwodefinitionsof‘tosublate‘canbecitedastwodictionary
        meaningsoftheword.Butitmuststrikeoneasremarkablethatalanguagehascometouse
        oneandthesamewordfortwooppositemeanings.Forspeculativethoughtitisgratifyingto
        findwordsthat haveinthemselves aspeculative meaning”(Hegel 2010, 81-82).
        Inthispaper,Aufhebungisusedasamethodologicalprocedure.Ieliminateknowledge
      fromthediscussedworksandapproachesthatdoesnothelptogaininsightsintodigital
      capitalism,whichmeansIdonotfocusonsuchknowledgeinthediscussion.Incontrast,
      elementsthathelpustobetterunderstanddigitalcapitalismarepreservedandatthesame
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1706                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      time transformed and reconstructed so that they together make up a new, qualitatively
      differentlevelofanalysisthatcontainsnew,emergentknowledgeaboutdigitalcapitalism
      thatcannotbereducedtotheknowledgecontainedintheworksthatformthefoundation
      of this article and the novel knowledge produced by it.
                                                             
      II How Not to Relate Spinoza’s Philosophy to Communication
      The digital is an aspect of the emergence of new means of information and commu-
      nicationthatarenotjustmeansofconsumptionbutalsomeansofproduction.Therefore,
      relating Spinoza to digital capital and digital labour is an aspect of the philosophy of
      communication.NotmuchhasbeenwrittenonSpinozaandthedigital.Incriticalsocial
      theory,thereareimportantexceptions,suchastheessaysbyKalpokas(2021)andFinelli
      (2021).1ThereisamoreestablishedandmorediscussedbodyofliteratureonSpinozaand
      communication.Asastartingpointofourdiscussion,wewanttohavealookatsecondary
      literature that has discussed how we can use Spinoza to think about communication.
        Spinoza lived in the Netherlands in the 17th century, a time when colonialism, ag-
      riculturalproduction,and(sea)trade(grain,timber,salt,wool,linen,hemp,beer,liquor,
      fish,sugar,tobacco,tar,soap,silk,yarn,iron,glass,chemicals,diamonds,needles,etc.)
      dominated the Dutch economy (Thalheimer 1928). Therefore, he obviously could not
      analyse the digital economy. But even when a thinker does not directly address a
      contemporaryissue,hisideasmightindirectlyandbasedonareinterpretationandfurther
      developmenthelpustobetterunderstandcontemporarysociety.Doingsorequiressetting
      suchathinkerinrelationtootherthinkers.ForaSpinozistanalysisofdigitalcapitalism,
      anarticulationofSpinoza’sthoughtwithMarxandNegriishelpful.Therefore,webriefly
      want to give an overview of how contemporary authors have related Spinoza to com-
      munication.Therearethreelogicsthatcanbefoundinsuchworks:(a)thefocusonthe
      communication of bodies innature, (b) human imagination,and (c) freedom ofspeech.
      We focus on some key works on Spinoza and communication, especially Matthew
      S. May’s (2009) essay ‘Spinoza and class struggle’ published in the journal Commu-
      nicationandCritical/CulturalStudies,ToniNegri’s(2017)bookSpinoza:ThenandNow
      whereherelatesthenotionofimmateriallabourtoSpinoza’swork,whichisevidentfrom
      oneofthebook’schaptertitles–‘ReflectionsontheImmaterial:Spinoza,Marx…and
      Today’ (Negri 2017, chapter 7), E´tienne Balibar’s (2008) book Spinoza and Politics
      (Balibar 2008) that contains the chapter ‘Politics and communication’ (Balibar 2008,
      chapter5),andBalibar’sessay‘Spinoza’sThreeGodsandtheModesofCommunication’
      (Balibar 2012).                                        
        First(a),thereistheargumentthatthecommunicationofbodiesthatSpinozadescribes
      isafoundationfor explaining class struggles (May 2009).May writes that ‘Marx reads
      labor power in the same way that Spinoza reads substance’ (May 2009, 205) and that
      Spinozasees‘thebodyascompositional’,whichisthe‘basisforaSpinozistapproachto
      classstruggle’.Workers’refusaltoworkmaybe‘translatedpracticallyintoanynumberof
      practicesofnon-collaborationprovidedthattheyaredeployedwithaneyetowardaffects
      astheanonymousforcesthatcommunicateacrossbodiesastheyencounterandtransform
      eachotherinaprocessofrevolutionarycomposition’(207).Mayarguesthatjustlikein
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1707     
                                                             
                                                             
      Spinoza’s works bodies ‘communicate’, in a workers’ rebellion, workers’ bodies com-
      municateandformarevolutionarysubject.Thisconnectionisveryfar-fetched.Spinoza
      didnottalkaboutlabourandclassstruggles.Hisnotionofthecommunicationofobjectsis
      notagoodstartingpointforthinkingaboutlabourstruggles.Furthermore,toarguethatall
      sorts of objects ‘communicate’ anthropomorphises nature and does not adequately
      distinguish between human and non-human matter.        
        Second(b),someapproachesarguethatSpinoza’snotionofimaginationcanbeusedto
      justify the notion of immaterial labour (Negri 2017, chapter 6). Negri (2017) takes
      Spinoza’snotionofimaginationasastartingpoint.Hewritesabout‘imagination,whichI
      andSpinozacanqualifywiththeadjective“immaterial”:thatofmakingpresenttous,and
      disposingtowardsaction,thethingsweface.Commonnotions,whichareconstructedby
      reason and imagination, thus become a constituent power’ (Negri 2017, 63).
        In his works, Spinoza says, for example, that ‘the human mind is able to imagine
      simultaneously and distinctly as many bodies as there are images that can be formed
      simultaneouslyinitsbody’(Spinoza1677/2002,266).Hewritesthatimaginationmeans
      that we form notions from ‘symbols. For example, from having heard or read certain
      wordswecallthingstomindandweformcertainideasofthemsimilartothosethrough
      which we imagine things’ (Spinoza 1677/2002, 267). Spinoza uses the notion of
      imagination in the context of images and calling things to mind, but not the terms
      ‘immaterial’ and ‘immateriality’. There is no real connection between imagination and
      immaterial labour.                                     
        Both Spinoza’s notions of the ‘communication’ of bodies and imagination are not
      suited for the analysis of communication in capitalism. The first argument’s logic is
      focusedongeneralobjectsinnature(whichincludessociety),thatis,anaturalisticlogic.
      The second argument’s logic is based on a particular feature of the human individual’s
      mind, namely imagination. Both logics are too abstract and, therefore, not suited for
      explaining aspects of communication in capitalism.     
        Third(c),thereisafocusonSpinoza’snotionoffreedomofspeech(Balibar2008).The
      ‘essentialelementinSpinoza’sconceptionofdemocracyisfreedomofcommunication’
      (Balibar 2008, 98). Balibar says that ‘Spinoza’s philosophy is, in a strong sense of the
      term,aphilosophyofcommunication’(101;seealsoBalibar2012,1989).ForSpinoza,
      desireisthehumanbeing’sessence.‘Nowdesireistheveryessence,ornature,ofeach
      individual insofar as that is conceived as determined by some given state of its con-
      stitutiontodosomething’(Spinoza1677/2002,308).Spinozadoesnotseparatethebody
      andthemind,ratherforhimthehumanbeingisonlyaunitythroughsoulandbody.The
      implicationisthatsocialrelationsbetweenhumansareatthesametimerelationsbetween
      human minds and human bodies (Balibar 2008, 106–107). Ideas and affects (joy or
      sadness,loveorhate,hopeorfear,etc.)accompanyeachother(108).ForSpinoza,there
      arethreetypesofknowledge:reason,imagination,andintuition(109).Democracyisfor
      Spinoza constituted by the freedom of expression and the expression of political ideas
      (114) as well as the ‘circulation of information’ (121) in the public sphere.
        Freedom of speech is a question of politics and democracy, which are important
      aspects of society. Balibar does not relate Spinoza’s notion of freedom of speech to
      capitalism,butstayspurelyfocusedontherealmofpolitics,whichisontheonehandno

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1708                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      surprisebecausehisbookholdsthetitleSpinozaandPolitics,butontheotherhandisa
      surprise because Balibarhas ahistoryasMarxistpolitical economist. Balibarmakes an
      argumentatthelevelatthelevelofsociety,whichisprogressincomparisontothefirst
      andsecondlogicsthatarefocusedonnature,respectively,theindividual.Missingisthe
      insightthatalsothemarketcanlimitfreedomofspeech.Evidentexamplesarecapitalist
      press monopolies that give media owners the power to privilege particular interests in
      reportingandthepopularityofthetabloidpressthatsimplifiesanddistortsnews,which
      limitsfreedomofspeech.SuchargumentscanbefoundinHabermas’(1991)analysisof
      thestructural transformation ofthe public sphere butnot inBalibar’s book onSpinoza.
      Freedomofspeechcertainlyisaveryimportanttopic.However,givenitspoliticalnature,
      itisnotsowellsuitedasastartingpointfortheanalysisofcapitalism’spoliticaleconomy.
        All three discussed strategies fail to relate Spinoza properly to the analysis of capi-
      talism.Afourth,morepromising,strategyisthatwestartfromSpinoza’snotionofpower.
      III Power as Potestas and Potentia                     
      Toni Negri has convincingly shown that there are two notions of power in Spinoza’s
      writings. In Spinoza’s works, there is ‘the separation between potentia and potestas,
      powerandPower’(Negri2004,15).Negristressesthatthisdistinctionisbestvisiblein
      Spinoza’sPoliticalTreatise(Tractatuspoliticus,TP).‘IntheTPthisdevelopmentreaches
      itsconclusion.TherelationshipbetweenPowerandpoweriscompletelyoverturned:only
      power, by constituting itself: only the power of the many, by making itself collective
      constitution,canfoundaPower.Inthisframework,Powerisnotseenasasubstance,but
      ratherastheproductofaprocessaimedatcollectiveconstitution,aprocessthatisalways
      reopened by the power of the multitudo’ (Negri 2004, 15). ‘Most European languages
      have two words for power – potestas and potentia in Latin, pouvoir and puissance in
      French, poder and potencia in Spanish, Macht and Vermo¨gen in German – whereas
      English has only one. This might seem at first sight an example of the poverty of the
      English language, and in the past we have tried to remedy it rather inelegantly with
      capitalization, distinguishing between Power and power, using Power to name the
      vertical, centralized ruling powers, capitalist command, and biopower while employing
      powerforthehorizontalprocessesofresistance,theforceoflivinglabor,andthecreative
      aspects of biopolitics’ (Hardt and Negri 2017, 70).    
        InthePoliticalTreatise,SpinozaspeaksofpotestasasPowerfromabove,dictatorial
      Power(dictoriapotestas):‘Sosincedictatorialpower[dictoriapotestas]isabsolute,itis
      bound to be a terror to all, especially if, as is here required, there is a fixed time for a
      dictatortobeappointed’(Spinoza1675-1677/2002,747–748).Arguingmoregenerally,
      SpinozadefinesPowerasexertingdominationandcontroloversomeone(subpotestate
      habere):                                               
        “Furthermore,itfollowsthateverymanissubjecttoanother’srightforaslongasheisinthe
        other’spower,andheisincontrolofhisownrighttotheextentthathecanrepelallforce,take
        whatevervengeancehepleasesforinjurydonetohim,and,ingeneral,liveashechoosesto
        live.Onemanhasanotherinhispowerifheholdshiminbonds,orhasdeprivedhimofthe
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1709     
                                                             
                                                             
        armsandmeansofself-defenceorescape,orhasterrorisedhim,orhassoattachedtheotherto
        himselfbybenefitconferredthatthemanwouldratherpleasehisbenefactorthanhimselfand
        liveastheotherwouldwishratherthanathisownchoosing.Hewhoholdsanotherinhis
        powerinthefirstorsecondwayholdsonlytheother’sbody,nothismind;inthethirdor
        fourthwayhehasmadetheother’sbodyandhismindsubjecttohisownright,butonlyas
        longasfearorhopeendures.Whenoneortheotherisremoved,themanremainsincontrolof
        hisownright.Thefacultyofjudgment,too,canbesubjecttoanother’srighttotheextentthat
        onemancanbedeceivedbyanother.Henceitfollowsthatthemindisfullyincontrolofitself
        only to the extentthat itcanuse reason aright”(Spinoza1675-1677/2002, 685-686).
        Spinozaheredistinguishesbetweentwobasicmeansofdomination,namelytheuseof
      violencethatthreatenstocreatebodilyandpsychologicalharmandtheuseofideology
      that tries to manipulate human consciousness in the interest of the dominant group.
        Spinoza opposes Power (potestas) to the multitude’s power (potentia). ‘The same
      powerthattheyneedinordertobegintoexist,theyalsoneedinordertocontinuetoexist’
      (Spinoza 1675-1677/2002, 683). Potentia means that humans ‘hold their rights in
      common’. Potentia is the multitude’s power, ‘the power of a people’ (potentia multi-
      tudinis). ‘This right, which is defined by the power of a people, is usually called sov-
      ereignty’(Spinoza1675-1677/2002,687).‘Ifthischargebelongstoacouncilcomposed
      ofthepeopleingeneral,thenthestateiscalledademocracy’(Spinoza1675-1677/2002,
      687).Inadictatorship,thereissupremePowerthatisdetachedfromanddominates the
      multitude. In a democracy, ‘the supreme Power is fully constituted by the power of the
      multitude’, and Power is ‘constituent Power, completely and freely constituted by the
      power of the multitude’ (Hardt 1991, xvi).             
        InhisinterpretationofSpinoza,ToniNegristressesthatallpowerrequiresafoundation
      thatworksbottom-up,whichiswhathetermsconstituentpower(potentia)thatisopposed
      toanddialecticallyrelatedtoconstitutedpower(potestas).Powerfromabove(potestas)is
      always the product of power from below. “In other words, the new cooperating and
      immaterial subject of society expresses itself essentially through constituent power.
      Constituentpoweragainstconstitutedpower,constituentpowerassingularsubjectivity,
      as productivity and cooperation, that asks how to be situated in society - and how to
      develop its own creativity. Democracy thus appears as constituent power. It is a power
      expressed by the multitude of singular subjects that excludes every transfer of powers”
      (HardtandNegri1994,310).JasonRead(2022,chapter10)stressesthatNegriinterprets
      Spinoza by applying the notion of power as potential (potentia) to living labour: Au-
      tonomousMarxismstressesthatcapitalisconstitutedbyandemergesfromtheworking
      classandthatthe‘startingpointmustbelabourandnotcapital’(Read2022,220).Read
      (2022,221-222)pointsoutthatNegriarguesthatthecapitalisteconomyisbasedonthe
      antagonisms between labour/capital, living labour/dead labour, life/death, wealth/
      poverty, etc.                                          
        In his Ethics, Spinoza simply opposes pain to pleasure, hate to love, fear to hope,
      despair to confidence, and disappointment to joy (Spinoza 1677/2002, 287–288). But
      there is no transformative project of social and class struggles that he identifies as im-
      portantforsuchsocietaltransformations.Struggleandpraxisdonotfeatureprominently.
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1710                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      In the Political Treatise, Spinoza conceives of potentia as the multitude’s power from
      below. Toni Negri has interpreted this power as a concept of class and social struggle.
      Negri(2017,chapter9)notesthatitisnotknowledgeandwisdom,asSpinozaandGoethe
      assumed,thathelpsovercomefear.Rather,‘onlystruggle[…]willgiveusawayoutof
      fear’ (Negri 2017, 107). He says that the ‘hatred of the bourgeois against the workers’
      (Negri 2017, 120) has to turn into the ‘hatred of the proletariat against the exploitative
      tyrant’asaconditionforemancipation(121).Hatredasasocietalcondition‘canturninto
      lovethroughtheconstructionofthecommonbythemultitude’(123).‘Today,inanepoch
      characterized by the crisis of capitalism, this rupture between (capitalistic) relations of
      production and (proletarian) productive forces has again reached a point of extreme
      tension. Potestas and potential are presented as an absolute antagonism’ (Negri
      1991b, 229).                                           
        Power on the one hand often is used to mean control and domination. On the other
      hand,thereisthenotionofempowerment,whichimpliesgrassrootspower,theoppressed
      andtheexploitedgroups’socialstruggles,etc.Inwell-establishedconceptsofpower,the
      SpinozistdualityanddialecticofpowerandPowerareoftennotpresent.Forexample,in
      oneofthemostfamousdefinitionsofpower,MaxWeberdoesnotadequatelydistinguish
      betweenpoweranddomination.Forhim,poweristhe‘chanceofamanoranumberof
      mentorealizetheirownwillinasocialactionevenagainsttheresistanceofotherswho
      are participating in the action’ (Weber 1978, 926). He defines domination as the
      ‘probabilitythatcertainspecificcommands(orallcommands)willbeobeyedbyagiven
      groupofpeople’(Weber1978,212).Weber’sdefinitionimpliesthatpowerissomething
      thatisnecessarilycoercivelydefendedbyonegroupagainstothergroups.Thisalsomeans
      an unbridgeable gap and relationship of domination between the powerful and the
      powerless. Weber’s definitions of power and domination are overlapping and strongly
      related,whichmeansthathedoesnotmakeclearthedifferencebetweenthetwonotions.
        Foucaultisweakinprovidingprecisedefinitions.Theonethingheisrememberedfor
      concerning power is that he stresses that power is not simply Power that ‘represses’
      (Foucault1977,250).HeaddsthatPower‘producesthings,itinducespleasure,itforms
      knowledge,itproducesdiscourse;itmustbeconsideredasaproductivenetworkwhich
      runsthroughtheentiresocialbodymuchmorethananegativeinstancewhosefunctionis
      repression’(Foucault1980,119).InfluencedbyNietzsche,Foucaultseemstoassumethat
      everyone has a will to Power and that Power is not just exerted by the powerful but
      requiresalsosubjectswhosubmittoPower,obeyit,trytobecomethenewcontrollersof
      Power,etc.‘Ifpowerwereneveranythingbutrepressiveifitneverdidanythingbutsay
      no,doyoureallythinkweshouldmanagetoobeyit?’(Foucault1980,119).ForFoucault,
      Powerisrelatedtohumanbodies,sexuality,consciousness,andeverydaylife.Forhim,a
      societywithoutdominationisnotpossible.Insuchanihilisticconceptionofsociety,there
      canjustbethedeconstructionofandchallengetodominantPowerbygroupswhowantto
      gain Power and define new truths.                      
        Negri’s interpretation of Spinoza in contrast to Weber and Foucault stresses the di-
      alecticofpowerandPower.ThereisnoPowerwithoutpowerthatconstitutes/produces
      andreproducesPower.GiventhatPowercannotexistwithoutasocietalpowerbase,this
      basethatactsfrombelowreproducesPower.Italwayshasthepotentialtochallengeand

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1711     
                                                             
                                                             
      radicallytransformsociety,aswellastoabolishthedominantPowersaswellasPowerin
      general.Collectiveresistanceisnotanautomatismbutalwaysapotential,whichiswhy
      powerispotentiaandtransformativepotential.ArulingclassorgroupenforcesPoweras
      domination with means such as violence, the state, markets, and ideology. Power is
      reproducedintheformofhegemonyfrombelow,whichmeansthattheindividualsand
      groupslivinginsocietyacceptthedominantrulesandenactthemintheireverydaylives.
      TherebytheireverydaypracticesthatareaformofpowerreproducePower.Atthesame
      time, they have the power potential (potentia) to collectively say ‘no’ and to transform
      society or those parts of it they are unhappy with.    
        Having focused on the question of power in Spinoza’s philosophy, we can next ask
      what the roles of power and Power are in capitalism.   
      IV Power and Labour in the Capitalist Economy          
                                                             
      Capitalism is a societal formation (Gesellschaftsformation) that is based on the accu-
      mulation of capital in the economic sphere, decision-power in the political sphere, and
      reputation in the cultural sphere (Fuchs 2022). A Structuralist interpretation of Marx
      proceeds by analysing the capitalist economy by focussing on commodities, money,
      capital, absolute surplus value, relative surplus value, capital accumulation, primitive
      accumulation, etc. It focuses on economic Power in capitalism and at best derives the
      analysisoftheworkingclassfromtheanalysisofcapital.Itoverlooksthatthereisalsothe
      power of the working class that needs to be understood right from the start. Wherever
      therearecapitalandcommodities,thereislabourthatproducescapital,commodities,and
      surplusvalue.MarxindeedbeginstheanalysisofcapitalisminCapitalVolumeIwiththe
      Structuralistsuggestionthattheinvestigationofthecapitalistmodeofproduction‘begins
      by analyzing the commodity’ (Marx 1867, 125). He then introduces use-value and
      exchange-value as the commodity’s two dimensions. After that, he says that if ‘we set
      aside the use-value belonging to the physical bodies of commodities, just one quality
      remains: they are products of labor’ (Marx 1867, 16) and that commodities are an ex-
      pression of ‘abstract human labor’ (Marx 1867, 16). This means that together with the
      Structuralistelementofthecommodity,MarxintroducestheHumanistelementoflabour
      in his analysis of the capitalist economy. Marx’s analysis of capitalism starts with the
      analysisofthe‘twofactorsofthecommodity:use-valueandvalue’(section1.1inCapital
      Volume I’s chapter 1), followed by the analysis of ‘the double character of the labour
      embodiedincommodities’(section1.2inchapter1):concreteworkandabstractlabour.
      Furthermore, Capital Volume I’s first chapter also contains an analysis of commodity
      fetishism (section 1.4), which is not accidental. Section 1.4 relates the analysis of
      commoditiesandlabour:Capitalistproductionhidestheclassrelationsandhumanlabour
      behind things so that capitalism does not appear as a class system but as an immense
      collectionofthings(commodities,money,andcapital).Themostimportantsociological
      insight we can learn from Marx is that everything in society is a social and societal
      relation.Capitalandcommoditiesarenotthingsbutsocialandsocietalrelations.Capital
      isarelationbetweencapitalandlabour.Foranalysingthecapitalistmodeofproduction,
      weneedtobringtogetheratonceHumanistandStructuralistanalysis.Thismeansthatwe
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1712                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      needtoanalysethecapitalisteconomyasaclasssystem,asystemofclassrelationsand
      associated practices and struggles.                    
        Tosaythatwhereverthereiscapitalthereislabourmeansthatwhereverthereiscapital
      there is the exploitation of labour by capital in class relations. Expressed in Spinozist
      terms:WhereverthereistheeconomicPowerofcapital,thereisthepoweroftheworking
      classthatproducescapitalandsurplusvalue.TheeconomicPowerofcapitalisbasedon
      andproducedbytheeconomicpoweroflabour.Thedialecticofworking-classpowerand
      capital’s Power is most powerfully expressed by Marx in a passage in the Grundrisse:
        “Separationofpropertyfromlabourappearsasthenecessarylawofthisexchangebetween
        capitalandlabour.Labourpositedasnot-capitalassuchis:(1)not-objectifiedlabour[nicht-
        vergegensta¨ndlichte Arbeit], conceived negatively (itself still objective; the not-objective
        itselfinobjectiveform).Assuchitisnot-raw-material,not-instrumentoflabour,not-raw-
        product:labourseparatedfromallmeansandobjectsoflabour,fromitsentireobjectivity.
        Thislivinglabour,existingasanabstractionfromthesemomentsofitsactualreality(also,
        not-value);thiscompletedenudation,purelysubjectiveexistenceoflabour,strippedofall
        objectivity. Labour as absolute poverty: poverty not as shortage, but as total exclusion of
        objective wealth. Or also as the existing not-value, and hence purely objective use value,
        existingwithoutmediation,thisobjectivitycanonlybeanobjectivitynotseparatedfromthe
        person: only an objectivity coinciding with his immediate bodily existence. Since the ob-
        jectivityispurelyimmediate,itisjustasmuchdirectnot-objectivity.Inotherwords,notan
        objectivitywhichfallsoutsidetheimmediatepresence[Dasein]oftheindividualhimself.(2)
        Not-objectifiedlabour,not-value,conceivedpositively,orasanegativityinrelationtoitself,
        isthenot-objectified,hencenon-objective,i.e.subjectiveexistenceoflabouritself.Labour
        notasanobject,butasactivity;notasitselfvalue,butasthelivingsourceofvalue.[Namely,
        it is] general wealth (in contrast to capital in which it exists objectively, as reality) as the
        generalpossibilityofthesame,whichprovesitselfassuchinaction.Thus,itisnotatall
        contradictory,or,rather,thein-every-waymutuallycontradictorystatementsthatlabouris
        absolutepovertyasobject,ononeside,andis,ontheotherside,thegeneralpossibilityof
        wealthassubjectandasactivity,arereciprocallydeterminedandfollowfromtheessenceof
        labour,suchasitispresupposedbycapitalasitscontradictionandasitscontradictorybeing,
        andsuchas it, in turn,presupposescapital”(Marx1857/1858,295-296).
        Marxhereforcefullyarguesthattheclassantagonismbetweencapitalandlabourisan
      antagonismbetweentheeconomicPowerofcapitalandtheeconomicpoweroflabourso
      thatlabour’spower(labour-powerinpractice)produceswealththatcapitalbecauseofits
      Power(thecontrolandownershipofthemeansofproductionthatdisempowerslabour’s
      ownershipandseparatestheworkingclassfromthecontrolofthesemeans)appropriates
      andownssothatlabourisatthesametimepoverty.Incapitalism,labourisatthesame
      time, as Marx says, the ‘general possibility of wealth’ and ‘absolute poverty’. Mario
      Tronti (2019, 214) points out that Marx in this passage foregrounds labour’s ‘wholly
      contradictory’character,‘preciselyduetothefactthatlabouritselfisacontradiction of
      capital – and, even before that, a contradiction for itself’. Toni Negri stresses that this
      passagemeansthatMarxstresseslabourasthe‘potentialofallwealth’(Negri1991a,69).
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1713     
                                                             
                                                             
      The ‘abstract collectivity of labor is subjective power (potenza)’ (Negri 1991a, 70).
      Labour is ‘a general power (potenza)’ (Negri 1991a, 70).
        Thepoweroflabouristhatitis‘thegeneralproductiveforceofwealth;activitywhich
      increases wealth’ (Marx 1857/1858, 307). In the work process, ‘the main force of
      production’ is ‘the human being himself’ (422). But in capitalism, capital ‘is the all-
      dominatingeconomicpowerofbourgeoissociety’(107).Asaconsequenceofcapitalist
      class relations, the economic Power of capital results in conditions where the working
      class‘surrendersitscreativepower’tocapital(307).The‘creativepowerof[…]labour
      establishesitselfasthepowerofcapital,asanalienpowerconfronting’labour(307).‘The
      collectivepoweroflabour,itscharacterassociallabour,isthereforethecollectivepower
      of capital’ (585).                                     
        Inclassrelations,theworkingclassisatthesametimethepowerfulproducerofwealth
      andthedisempoweredclassofthedispossessedthatisstrippedofownershipandforcedto
      sell its labour-power as a commodity and to produce surplus-value in order to survive.
      Capital’s economic Power depends on the working class’ power to create wealth.
      Therefore, the working class is not just disempowered and dispossessed by capital but
      alsohasthepowertobringdowncapitalbystoppingtowork.Thestrikeistheworking
      class’powerofresistanceagainstcapital.Inthiscontext,HardtandNegristressthatthe
      poweroftheworkingclasstocreatewealthandcapital’sdependenceonlabourisalsoa
      threat to capital: ‘Like Machiavelli and Spinoza, Marx links the proletariat’s poverty
      directly to its power in the sense that living labor is “the general possibility of material
      wealth”incapitalistsociety.[…]Marxconceivesthisexplosivecombinationofpoverty
      andpowerastheultimatethreattoprivateproperty,onewhichresidesatitsveryheart’
      (Hardt and Negri 2009, 54).                            
        Working-class struggles and working-class resistance are, however, no automatisms,
      but economic potentia, a mere potential. There is the danger of over-optimism, of as-
      suming that the working class must resist and does resist by necessity. In some for-
      mulations,HardtandNegriseemtoassumethatthereisanautomatismofrevolutionary
      subjectivity. For example, ‘This double character of poverty and possibility defines the
      subjectivityoflaborincreasinglyclearlyintheimmaterialparadigm.Thewealthitcreates
      istakenaway,andthisisthesourceofitsantagonism.Yetitretainsitscapacitytoproduce
      wealth, and this is its power. In this combination of antagonism and power lies the
      makingsofarevolutionarysubjectivity’(HardtandNegri2004,153).Thispassagecanbe
      read as meaning that revolutionary praxis emanates automatically from capitalism’s
      antagonistic class relations.                          
        Suchover-optimismcanalsobefoundinsomepassagesofMarioTronti’sworkswho
      writes,forexample,that‘theincessantdevelopmentoftheproductiveforcescannotbut
      provoketheincessantdevelopmentofthegreatestproductiveforce,theworkingclassas
      revolutionary class’ (Tronti 2019, 32). The formulation that capitalist development
      ‘cannotbutprovoke’thedevelopmentofthe‘revolutionaryclass’canbereadasmeaning
      that revolutionary developments emerge by necessity. But such formulations are also
      corrected by more careful formulations such as the one that the ‘working class within
      capitalism is the only irresolvable contradiction of capitalism – or, better, it becomes
      irresolvable the moment it self-organises as revolutionary class’ (Tronti 2019, 34).

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1714                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      Working class struggles are a mere potential that becomes a powerful reality when the
      working class organises itself by going on strike, creating self-managed companies,
      making political demands for better working conditions, etc. Having focused on labour
      andpowerincapitalism,wewillnextdiscusspowerandlabourindigitalcapitalismbased
      onthecombinationofSpinoza,Marx,andNegri.Thiswillbeaccomplishedinthreesteps
      byanalysingthedigitalclassrelationasdigitalpotestasanddigitalpotentia(section5),
      the notion of ‘immaterial’ labour (section 6), and the antagonism between the digital
      relationsofproductionandthedigitalproductiveforces(section7).Whatholdstogether
      andconnectstheanalysesthatfollowinsections5,6,and7asaredthreadistheinsight
      thatthecombinationofSpinoza,Marx,andNegriprovidesagoodunderstandingofclass
      relations and capitalism as a dialectic of working-class potentia and capital’s potestas,
      whichwereconceptualiseastheantagonismbetweendigitalpotentiaanddigitalpotestas.
      Next, we will therefore focus on a section that engages based on the combination of
      Spinoza,Marx,andNegriwiththeanalysisoftheclassrelationbetweendigitallabourand
      digital capital.                                       
                                                             
      V Digital Capitalism 1: Digital Class Relations as Digital Potestas
      and Digital Potentia                                   
      Digitalcapitalismisadimension,aspect,anddimensionof21st-centurycapitalistsociety.
      Digital capitalism means aspects of the capitalist societal formation where digital
      technologies mediate the accumulation of capital in the capitalist economy, the accu-
      mulationofdecision-powerinthepoliticalsystem,andtheaccumulationofreputationin
      theculturalsystem(Fuchs2022).Digitalcapitalisthestructuraleconomicdimensionof
      digital capitalism. Digital capital is digital potestas, economic Power in the digital
      capitalist economy that is imposed on workers, consumers, citizens, and society from
      above. Digital potestas dominates and exploits digital potentia, that is, digital labour’s
      potentials. Digitalcapital isaform ofexploitation anddomination,apoliticaleconomy
      thatconstitutesandgovernstheclassrelationbetweentheownersandorganisersofthe
      digitalmeansofproductionandthosewhoasdigitalworkersproduceandputtousethese
      meansofproductioninordertocreatedigitalcommodities.Digitalcapitaliscapitalthat
      takesontheformofdigitalcommodities.Digitalcapitalappearsinsocialformssuchas
      digital advertising capital (Google/Alphabet, Facebook/Meta Platforms, ByteDance/
      TikTok, etc.), software capital (Microsoft, Oracle, etc.), digital hardware capital (Ap-
      ple’s iPhone, Taiwan Semiconductor, Cisco Systems, Hon Hai Precision, Intel, etc.),
      telecommunications capital (Verizon Communications, China Mobile, Deutsche Tele-
      kom, Comcast, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, Charter Communications, China
      Telecom,AT&T,etc.),digitalmerchant’scapital(Amazon,Alibaba,etc.),digitalfinance
      capital(PayPal,eBay,etc.),etc.Thismeansthatdigitalcapitalisaunityindiversity.All
      thecompaniesjustlistedhaveincommonthattheyturnthedigitalintocommoditiesand
      digitalcapitalandforproducingdigitalcommoditiesexploitavarietyofformsoflabour.
      However, the digital commodity takes on a variety of forms and capital accumulation
      models.                                                
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1715     
                                                             
                                                             
        Digital capital is a powerful capital faction in the contemporary capitalist economy.
      The two main geographical locations of digital capital’s headquarters are the USA and
      China(Fuchs2021).Oneofthefeaturesofdigitaltechnologiesandnetworkedcomputer
      systemsisthattheysupportnetworkingandhelptranscendboundaries,includingspatio-
      temporalboundaries,whichiswhydigitalcapitaloperatestransnationally,internationally,
      and globally.                                          
        From Spinoza, we learn that potestas requires potentia. From Marx, we learn that
      capitalism should be analysed as a class system, which requires uniting Humanist and
      Structuralistanalysis.FromNegri,welearnthatlabouraspotentiaandpowerconstitutes
      capital’sPowerandpotestas,whichimpliesthattheworkingclassisnotjustalienatedbut
      holdsthepowertodisruptandbringdowncapitalbyrefusingtoworkintheformofthe
      strike action. Analysing digital capitalism in a Spinozist–Marxian–Negrian way means
      stressing that the Power of digital capital (digital potestas), that is, the accumulation of
      digitalcapital,istheproductofdigitallabour(digitalpotentia).Digitallabourproduces
      digitalcapital. Thereisnodigital capital without digitallabour.Digitallabour islabour
      that produces digital commodities, that is, commodities that take on digital forms. The
      digital working class includes all workers who contribute to the production of digital
      commodities.                                           
        Labourispotentiabecauseitconstantlyrealiseseconomicpotentialsthatasconstant
      work result in use-values and as abstract labour produce commodities. Economic po-
      tentials are turned into capitalist actualities in the form of commodities’ use-values,
      values, and exchange-values. Digital labour as digital potentia produces a variety and
      differentformsofdigitalcommoditiesanddigitalcapital.Thismeansthatdigitalpotentia
      producesdigitalpotestas.Justliketherearedifferentformsofdigitalcapital,thereisalso
      avarietyofformsofdigitallabourthatisorganisedintheformofaninternationaldivision
      of digital labour (Fuchs 2014, 2015):                  
        · Extractivedigitallabourislabourthatextractsmineralsoutofwhichcomponentsof
          digital hardware are created.                      
        · Industrialdigitallabourislabourthatmanufacturesandassemblesdigitalhardware.
        · Digitalknowledgelabourislabourthatusesdigitalhardwareforproducingdigital
          content and digital knowledge such as software, websites, digital music, digital
          videos, digital images, digital games, digital animations, data, meta-data, social
          data, etc.                                         
        · Digitalservicelabourislabourthatusesdigitalhardwareanddigitalsoftwarefor
          producingservicessuchasthedeliveryoffoodandparcels,thetransportofhumans
          from location A to location B by taxi, care work, the delivery of parcels to cus-
          tomerswhoorderedcommoditiesonline,onlineattentiontodigitaladvertising,call
          centrelabour,contentmoderation(thedigitalcleaners),etc.Digitalservicelabour
          doesnotcreatedigitalcontentbutawiderangeofservicesthatareproducedwith
          the help of digital means of production.           
        · Digital disposal labour is labour that decomposes electronic waste in order to
          extract components and precious metals that are reused.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1716                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
        This list shows that for the digital capitalist economy to exist, a variety of forms of
      digitallabourthatareallexploitedbydigitalcapitalisneeded.Thediverseformsofdigital
      labourhaveincommonthattheyareallexploitedbydigitalcapital.Theydifferintermsof
      thedigitalcommoditiestheyproduceandtheconcreteformtheclassrelationtakeson.For
      example, Silicon Valley software engineers are highly paid and heavily overworked
      wage-workers.Theyfaceamanagementstylethatstressesthatsoftwareproductionisa
      cultureoffun,self-determination,andself-fulfilment,whichresultsinaheavycultureof
      overtimeanddigitalworkerswhotendtothinkandfeellikemanagersbutsufferfromthe
      lackoffreetimeandfriendshipsandlifeoutsideofthecompany(Fuchs2024).Incontrast,
      ChinesehardwareassemblersinFoxconnfactoriesaredigitalworkerswhofaceTaylorist
      managementmethodsthatworkwithsurveillance,threats,andpunishmentsinadditionto
      relatively low wages (Chan et al. 2020; Qiu 2017). For using a computer and a mobile
      phone, both types of digital labour, the play labour of the Silicon Valley software en-
      gineers and the labour of Foxconn workers, who face ‘bloody Taylorization’ (Lipietz
      1987,76),arerequiredsothatdigitalcapitalexploitsavarietyofformsofdigitallabour
      that have in common that they produce digital capital. 
        Digital labour has an internationally networked character, which means that digital
      knowledgelabourthatcreatesdigitalcontentanddigitalservicelabourarebasedonand
      cannot exist without extractive and industrial digital labour. The result of one type of
      digitallabourentersasameansofproductionintootherformsofdigitallabour.Onetype
      of digital potentia calls forth and in objectified form enters into another type of digital
      potentia.Mostdigitalworkersdonotknoweachotheranddonotencountereachother.
      Their labour is related via an anonymous international division of digital labour that
      creates the Power of digital capital. While digital capital is networked and organised
      globally, digital labour is as such dispersed, anonymous, fragmented, and unorganised.
        Giventhatentireeconomiesandthecapitalistworldeconomydependondigitalcapital
      thatiscreatedbyworkersintheinternationaldivisionofdigitallabour,thedigitalworkers
      oftheworldpossesstremendouspower(digitalpotentia),thatis,thepotentialtobringthe
      world economyandthedigitaleconomytoahaltwhen theygoonstrike.Whendigital
      workers become a digital working class in-and-for-itself they realise their power po-
      tentialstoresistdigitalcapital.Digitalworkersbecomeanorganisedandself-organising
      digitalworkingclasswhentheyorganisecollectivelyasapoliticalsubjectagainstdigital
      capitalintheformofdigitallabourunions,digitallabourrefusals,digitallabourstrikes,
      self-mangeddigitalworkerco-operatives,andpolitical demandssuchasthetaxation of
      digitalcapital,wageincreases,andlabourtimereductionwithfullwagecompensationfor
      digital workers, a social wage for unpaid digital labour in the form of an unconditional
      basic income guarantee, etc. The Power of digital capital, that is, the accumulation of
      digital capital, is produced by digital labour’s power to create digital wealth. Digital
      wealth is, however, privately owned and therefore primarily benefits the digital bour-
      geoisie.Ittakesontheformofdigitalcapital,digitalwealththatbenefitsthepocketsofthe
      few.Thedigitalworkingclasshasatremendouspowerpotentialtoresistandappropriate
      digital capital so that it is turned into digital wealth and digital commons for all that
      benefit all.                                           
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1717     
                                                             
                                                             
        Theworkingclass’power,itspotentia,entailsthatinproducingcapitalitcantakethe
      action to refuse production, to go on strike. To stop production is the working class’
      politicalpotential.Todoso,itmustbecomeacritical,class-consciousforcethatopposes
      capital’sPower (potestas).Thedigitalworking class asdigitalpotentiahasthepolitical
      power to stop producing the Power of digital capital by going on a digital strike and
      refusing to do digital labour. In digital class struggles, digital labour as politically or-
      ganiseddigitalpotentiahasthepowertoquestionandpracticallycriticisedigitalcapital’s
      potestas. This requires new forms of (digital) class struggles and (digital) strikes.
        Digital labour is based on traditional and relatively new forms of labour. Extractive
      digital labour is traditional agricultural labour where humans work directly with and in
      nature from which they extract minerals. Industrial digital labour and digital disposal
      labour are forms of manufacturing labour. They are often organised in Taylorist and
      Fordist ways that feature highly coercive forms of labour control. Digital knowledge
      labour and digital service labour feature relatively new forms of labour. They form the
      realmwherenewmanagementtechniquessuchasso-called‘participatory’management
      are often applied. Such management experiments that are new forms of absolute and
      relative surplus value production are possible in these new realms of labour because
      digitalknowledgelabour(a)featureshighlyskilledlabourthathassignificantdegreesof
      creativity,self-reliance,andself-realisation,(b)requiresahighlevelofco-operation,and
      is(c)basedonthehumanbrainasameansofproduction.Asaconsequence,suchlabour
      involvesahighdegreeofaffectivitywhereworkersidentifypositivelywiththeproducts
      they produce and see these products as part of their selves.
        Autonomist Marxist theorists such as Hardt/Negri and Lazzarato have analysed the
      subjectivityoflabourintheageofdigitalcapitalism as‘immaterial labour’.Inthenext
      section, we will focus on this category.               
      VI Digital Capitalism 2: ‘Immaterial’ Labour           
      HardtandNegriseedigitalknowledgelabouranddigitalservice labouraspartofwhat
      theycall‘immateriallabour’.TheybuildonMaurizioLazzarato(1996,132),whodefined
      immaterial labour as ‘labor that produces the informational and cultural content of the
      commodity’.Theydefineimmateriallabouras‘laborthatproducesanimmaterialgood,
      suchasaservice,aculturalproduct,knowledge,orcommunication’(Hardt&Negri2000,
      290);‘laborthatproducesimmaterialproducts,suchasinformation,knowledges,ideas,
      images, relationships, and affects’. (Hardt & Negri 2004, 65); labour ‘that creates im-
      materialproducts,suchasknowledge,information,communication,arelationship,oran
      emotional response’ (Hardt and Negri 2004, 108).       
        Hardt and Negri (2004, 108) distinguish between two forms of immaterial labour:
      intellectual labour and affectual labour: ‘The first form refers to labor that is primarily
      intellectual or linguistic, such as problem solving, symbolic and analytical tasks, and
      linguistic expressions. This kind of immaterial labor produces ideas, symbols, codes,
      texts,linguisticfigures,images,andothersuchproducts.Wecalltheotherprincipleform
      of immaterial labor “affective labor.” Unlike emotions, which are mental phenomena,
      affectsreferequallytobodyandmind.Infact,affects,suchasjoyandsadness,revealthe
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1718                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      presentstateoflifeintheentireorganism,expressingacertainstateofthebodyalongwith
      a certain mode of thinking. Affective labor, then, is labor that produces or manipulates
      affectssuchasafeelingofease,well-being,satisfaction,excitement,orpassion.Onecan
      recognize affective labor, for example, in the work of legal assistants, flight attendants,
      and fast food workers (service with a smile)’.         
        Immaterial labour is a misnomer because the term suggests that materiality means
      physicality.Theconceptimpliesthatmatterandspiritaretwoopposedsubstances,which
      is a dualistic conception of the world. Immaterial labour is also a quite non-Spinozist
      concept.ForSpinoza,‘intheuniversethereisonlyonesubstance,andthisisabsolutely
      infinite’ (Spinoza 1677/2002, 224); there is ‘no other substance but God’ (224); and
      Nature is God (‘the eternal and infinite being, whom we call God, or Nature’, Spinoza
      1677/2002,321).Takingthesepropositionstogethermeansthatnatureissubstanceand
      thatallmatteremergesfromandispartofnature.AgainsthisownSpinozistphilosophical
      base and Spinoza’s materialist monism, Negri implicitly and perhaps unwillingly sep-
      arates spirit and matter, mind and body, intellect and physicality.
        SpinozaisamaterialistmonistwhostandsincontrasttoDescartes’substancedualism
      wheretherearetwosubstances,themindandphysicalbodies.Spinozaquestionsdualist
      solutionstothemind/bodyproblem.Forhim,thereis‘theunionofMindandBody’;‘the
      humanMindisunitedtotheBody’(Spinoza1677/2002,251).Negri1991b,xvii)himself
      acknowledgesthat‘SpinozafoundsModernmaterialisminitshighestform’.ForSpinoza,
      thereistheextendedsubstancethatisalsocalled‘corporealsubstance’andthe‘thinking
      substance’(Spinoza2002,208).Thelatterconsistsof‘humanminds’(208)andis‘matter
      ofthehumancondition’(10-11).ForSpinoza,thehumanmindisnotseparatefromnature
      andmatter,butonespecificformofmatterandnature.Therefore,itisbettertoavoidthe
      term‘immateriality’andtospeakofknowledgelabourorinformationallabourinsteadof
      ‘immateriallabour’.JasonRead(2024)stressesinthiscontextthatwhatconnectsMarx
      and Spinoza is that both see politics as immanent to the economy and the economy as
      immanent to politics as well as the material immanent to the mental and the mental
      immanent to the material. Read calls this the double shift between the economy and
      politics,thematerialandthemental,thebodyandthemind.Thesepairsofcategoriesare
      ‘twodifferentwaysofunderstandingthesamething’;thereisthe‘identityandnonidentity
      ofmindandbody,habits,andtheimagination’(Read2024,8).Thinkingthisassumption
      to the end, Raymond Williams (1977, 190) has formulated the approach of Cultural
      Materialism that argues that ideas and the ‘modes of consciousness are material’
      (Williams1977,190;foradiscussionoftherelevanceofCulturalMaterialismintheage
      of digital capitalism, see Fuchs 2017 & Fuchs 2023).   
        What Hardt and Negri term ‘immaterial labour’ should better be referred to as
      knowledgelabour.Knowledgelabourismoregeneralthandigitallabour.Italsoincludes,
      for example, the labour of actors performing a theatre play live or the labour of a sales
      assistant who tries to convince customers in a shop that they should buy certain com-
      moditiesbyarguingthatthepurchasewillpositivelyenhancetheiridentitiesandstyle,etc.
      WhilealldigitalknowledgelabourandalldigitalservicelabourarewhatHardtandNegri
      term‘immaterial’labour,notall‘immaterial’labourisdigital.Digitalisation,however,in
      onewayoranotherinfluencesmostformsofcontemporarylabour.Digitalworkersarenot

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1719     
                                                             
                                                             
      partofanimmaterialworkingclassbutratheroftheworkingclassfactionofknowledge
      workers who not just produce digital commodities but all sorts of informational com-
      modities. Knowledge workers as potentia produce knowledge capital that as potestas
      dominates and exploits knowledge labour. Knowledge labour, however, also has the
      political potential to undermine knowledge capital by refusing labour and politically
      organising,whichmakesthequestion‘Willknowledgeworkersoftheworldunite?’that
      was first posed by Vincent Mosco and Catherine McKercher (2009) a key political
      question of knowledge and informational capitalism.    
        Hardt and Negri (2004, 108) write that most ‘actual jobs involving immaterial labor
      combinethesetwoforms’ofimmateriallabour,namelyintellectualandaffectuallabour.
      Many forms of highly skilled digital knowledge labour do not just create digital
      knowledge products but are also highly affectual in character. Although conceptually
      confusing,HardtandNegri’snotionofimmateriallabourpointsinanimportantdirection,
      namelytheimportanceoffocussingonhowcapitalincontemporarycapitalismmanages
      workers’ emotions and affects. This means that many digital knowledge workers feel a
      special affectual connection to their labour and their products of labour. They see
      themselvesasartistswhoarehighlycreativeandwhohaveajobthatisfunandaformof
      pleasure. They feel privileged and have an artistic ethos. Typically, digital knowledge
      workersdescribetheirlabourinthefollowingways:Youare‘beingpaidforyourhobby’
      (Gill2007,14);‘It’sahobbyandworkcombined’(Gill2007,14);‘Itissomuchfun’(Gill
      2007, 14).                                             
        Indigitalknowledgelabour,thePowerofdigitalcapital(digitalpotestas)appearstobe
      invisibletoworkers.Exploitationandself-exploitationdonotfeelalienatedbutlikefun,
      self-fulfilment, play, and pleasure.In digital knowledge labour, the boundaries between
      labourandplay,labourtimeandleisuretime,theworkplaceandthehome,productionand
      consumption,professionalismandhobby,etc.areoftenblurredandindistinguishable.It
      is, therefore, no surprise that such labour has been one of the primary sites where new
      management methods that organise the workplace as a playground, stress teamwork,
      participation, informality, fun, co-operation, self-determined start times of labour, etc.
      havebeenexplored(BoltanskiandChiapello2005).Asaconsequence,digitalknowledge
      labourisoftenatthesametimehighlyself-fulfillingandhighlystressful.Undercapitalist
      conditions,itislabourthatisatthesametimepleasurablebutinducesthepainofapoor
      work-life balance.                                     
        Digital knowledge labour is often project-based: ‘In the new world, anything is
      possible,sincecreativity,reactivity,andflexibilityarethenewwatchwords.Nownoone
      isrestrictedbybelongingtoadepartmentorwhollysubjecttotheboss’sauthority,forall
      boundariesmaybetransgressedthroughthepowerofprojects’(BoltanskiandChiapello
      2005, 90). Precisely because it presents itself as opposed to Taylorist forms of man-
      agementandasaformofhumanemanagement,post-Fordistmanagementissoinhumane.
      Ituses fun andtheaffectualattachmentofworkers totheir labour asmeans ofabsolute
      surplus value production (overtime, longer working times) and relative surplus value
      production(higherintensityandproductivityoflabour).‘TheTaylorizationofworkdoes
      indeedconsistintreatinghumanbeingslikemachines.Butpreciselybecausetheypertain
      toanautomation ofhuman beings,therudimentary characterof themethods employed

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1720                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      doesnotallowthemorehumanpropertiesofhumanbeings–theiremotions,theirmoral
      sense, theirhonour,theirinventive capacity– tobeplaced directly intheservice ofthe
      pursuit of profit. Conversely, the new mechanisms, which demand greater commitment
      and rely on a more sophisticated ergonomics, integrating the contributions of post-
      behaviourist psychology and the cognitive sciences, precisely because they are more
      humane in a way, also penetrate more deeply into people’s inner selves – people are
      expected to “give” themselves to their work – and facilitate and instrumentalization of
      human beings in their most specifically human dimensions’ (Boltanski and Chiapello
      2005, 98).                                             
        Digital knowledge labour appears to be fun, self-fulfilment, pleasurable, and self-
      determined.Atthesametime,itcreatesanewformofpovertyasaformofsocialpain,
      namely social poverty where humans work long hours, do not have enough time for
      hobbies,friends,andfamily,haveapoorwork-lifebalance,etc.Post-Fordistmanagement
      methods work by blurring the affectual boundaries between pleasure and pain, joy and
      sadness,loveandhate,hopeandfear,despairandconfidence,etc.Spinoza(1677/2002)
      definesthehumanbeingasanemotionalbeingandstressesthat“emotionsarerelatedto
      desire,pleasureorpain“(Spinoza1677/2002,310).Post-FordistmanagementisSpinozist
      managementinthatitmanagesaffectsandtriestointegrateworkers’entiresubjectivity,
      including theiraffects,emotions,andmindsintothelabour process.Digital potestas as
      capitalistmanagementformtargetsdigitallabour’semotions,feelings,minds,andaffects.
      Digitalcapitalistmanagementisamongotherthingsalsoaffectualmanagement.Building
      on Spinoza and Marx, Jason Read (2024, 84) argues that contemporary capitalism
      ‘reorients pleasure toward work’ and ‘the pleasure of employment itself’. Post-Fordist
      management is a type of management that works by ideology and, in contrast to Tay-
      lorism,notprimarilybyviolence,strictrules,andpunishment.Post-Fordistmanagement
      integrates,disembeds,encourages,supports,rewards,etc.inordertopositivelyappealto
      andmanageworkers’affects.Itisaffectualmanagementthattargetsworkers’affectsin
      order to try to make them work longer and more productively.
        ‘Now desire is the very essence, or nature, of each individual insofar as that is
      conceivedasdeterminedbysomegivenstateofitsconstitutiontodosomething’(Spinoza
      1677/2002, 308).IfwhatSpinoza says istrue, thenhumansstrive toconductworkthat
      they find self-fulfilling, purposeful, and pleasurable. As a consequence, creative and
      artisticworkisdesirable,whichexplainswhymanyyoungpeopletodaywanttoworkin
      the realms of culture and the media.                   
        Google is a typical example of a digital corporation that uses new management
      methods.Itsofficecomplexesoftenlooklikeplaygroundsandaffectsaremanagedbythe
      integrationofleisurefacilities,restaurants,freefood,informality,invitedspeakers,team-
      building activities, etc.                              
        Glassdoor is a platform that features company reviews. I searched for Google job
      reviewsonGlassdoor.TheperiodIfocusedonwasfromthestartofJanuaryuntiltheend
      ofMay2023.Iselectedallpostingsthatcontainedthekeyword‘hour*’,whichresultedin
      145 postings about working hours at Google. 112 out of the 145 comments (77.2%)
      criticisedpoorwork-lifebalanceandlongworkinghoursatGoogle.Herearesometypical
      commentsbyGoogleworkers:‘Longhourstiringandstressful’;‘toxicworkculturethat

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1721     
                                                             
                                                             
      leavespeopleworkingallhours.Recentlayoffshaveleftpeopleatalllevelsafraidtosay
      no,makingeverythingworse’;‘Iguesstheold“Don’tbeevil”mantradiedalongtime
      agohere.Getreadytoworklonghoursandhavenovacation time,too’;‘Lotsofhours
      AlwaysworkingNeveroff’;‘Badmanagersandlonghours’;‘Highpressureenvironment
      andlonghours’;‘Peoplewhopushbackononlyworking100%ofthetimeareseenas
      “notateamplayer.”Don’tbefooled–freelunches,remoteworksetups,andmassagesare
      justwaystokeepyouoverworking’;‘horriblework-lifebalanceandbadhours’;‘Work
      lotsofhours.Meetingsalldayandeveningsspentfollowingupinemail.Constantfires
      thatdisruptyourdayandeverythingisurgent’;‘mentallydraininglonghoursnoworklife
      balance’; ‘Advice to Management: More time off’.       
        Googleworkersarehighlypaidandsociallypoor.Manyofthemarerichinmonetary
      termsbutpoorinsocialterms.Theylackfreetimeandtimeforsocialrelationsoutsidethe
      company. Google management uses the strategy of absolute surplus value production.
      Management does everything to get workers to stay in the office and work long hours.
        Networked digital technologies support the transcendence of boundaries. They are
      boundary-transcendingtechnologies.Withthehelpofdigitaltechnologies,consumersof
      informationbecomeproducersofinformation.Byutilisingdigitaltechnologies,workers
      can work from home and from everywhere. Mobile phones, tablets, and laptops are
      mobile offices. As a consequence, it is easier for management to attempt to blur the
      boundaries between home/office, labour/play, labour time/leisure time, etc. The long-
      hourscultureisnotbuiltintodigitaltechnologiesorthedigitalindustriesassuch.Rather,
      managers in the capitalist digital media industries create working conditions that tran-
      scend socialboundaries sothat digital workers, who utilise digital media asameans of
      production and produce digital commodities, are coerced into working long hours, ig-
      noring the boundaries between labour and leisure, etc. and produce ever more surplus
      value. The long-hours culture is a strategy of absolute surplus value production, which
      meansthelengtheningoftheworkingday.Giventhatdigitalmediasupportnetworking
      and boundary-transcendence, management strategies that utilise networking and
      boundary-transcendence as methods of absolute and relative surplus value production
      mightbeusedparticularlyfrequentlyinthedigitalindustries.Digitalknowledgeworkers
      requiresocialnetworkingaspartoftheirskills,whichiswhytheymightbeparticularly
      pronetotranscendsocialboundaries(betweenlabour/leisure,home/workplace,pleasure/
      pain,etc.)intheirlabourpracticeswhentheyarehailedbynetwork-basedandboundary-
      transcending management strategies.                    
        One key aspect of a Marxian analysis of capitalism is the investigation of the an-
      tagonism between the productive forces and the relations of production. In digital
      capitalism, thisquestionneedstobeposedconcerningdigitalcapitalanddigitallabour.
      VII Digital Capitalism 3: The Antagonism Between the (Digital)
      Relations of Production and the (Digital Productive) Forces
      A key feature of the capitalist economy is what Marx (1867; 1857/1858) terms the
      antagonism between the relations of production and the productive forces. The devel-
      opmentoftheproductiveforcesontheonehandmakeslabourmoreproductivewhereby
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1722                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      thelatter’sexploitationisdeepened.Ontheotherhand,thedevelopmentoftheproductive
      forcesoftenadvancesthesocialisationoflabour,itsco-operativecharacter,aswellasthe
      potentialsforthesocialmanagementofcompanies,thecollectiveownershipofthemeans
      of production, and the reduction of necessary labour time to a minimum.
        Marxstressesthatincapitalism,theantagonismbetweentheproductiveforcesandthe
      relations of production advances the economy’s crisis tendencies: ‘The growing in-
      compatibility between the productive development of society and its hitherto existing
      relations of production expresses itself in bitter contradictions, crises, spasms’ (Marx
      1857/1858, 749). At the same time, new potentials for a socialist economy of the
      commonsemerge.Digitaltechnologiestendtoincreaselabourproductivity,whichunder
      capitalistconditionsresultsinantagonismsaroundlabour-time.Forexample,whilesome
      work long hours, others are precarious workers or unemployed.
        Informationisnotusedupduringconsumption.Itcanbesimultaneouslyconsumedby
      manyindividuals(non-rivalrousconsumption).Itcanbeeasilyandcheaplycopied.Itis
      difficult to exclude individuals from access to information (non-exclusion). Digital
      networkssupportthecheapandeasyglobalcopyingandspreadingofinformation.Inthe
      digital age, the specific characteristics of digital information undermine the private
      property character of digital commodities. While digital capital develops new capital
      accumulation strategies, it always faces the danger of users and consumers copying
      informationwithoutpayingforitandturningdigitalinformationanddigitaltechnologies
      into common goods that are not commodities and are available to everyone without
      payment. Digital capitalism’s economy therefore not only contains an antagonism be-
      tweendigitalcapitalanddigitallabourbutrelatedtoitalsoanantagonismbetweendigital
      commodities and the digital commons. The networked, boundary-transcending, non-
      rivalrous, non-exclusionary character of the digital advances at the same time digital
      commodification and potentials for digital commonification. The antagonism between
      digitalcommoditiesandthedigitalcommonsisanexpressionoftheantagonismbetween
      the digital relations of production (the class relation between digital labour and digital
      capital) and the networked digital productive forces.  
        Digital labour is an expression of the mentalisation of the productive forces. In
      knowledge labour, the brain is a key means of production. Marx anticipated the
      emergenceof knowledge labour as an important productive force when he wrotein the
      Grundrisse that as part of the development of fixed capital, the ‘general intellect’, by
      whichhemeans‘generalsocialknowledge’,becomes‘adirectforceofproduction’(Marx
      1857/1858,706).Thebrainasameansofproductionismoredifficulttosubsumeunder
      capital and to be controlled by capital than machines, buildings, and other physical
      resources.Thebrainisphysicallyattachedtothehumanbodyand,asSpinozaknew,not
      detachablefromthebody.Knowledgelabourisincontrasttoindustrialandagricultural
      labourbrain-drivenandstronglybrain-based.Knowledgeisaproductofthehumanmind.
      Therefore,thedigitalmeansofproductioncanbemoreeasilyself-managedinthedigital
      knowledgeindustrythanintraditionalindustries.Self-managedlabourinawayisalready
      present in digital knowledge labour’s ethos of self-fulfilled labour. This quest for cre-
      ativity andself-fulfilmenthastodo with the fact thatthe brain isutilised asameans of
      productionindigitalknowledgelabour.Thereisarelativelyhighleveloffreelancelabour

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1723     
                                                             
                                                             
      amongdigitalknowledgeworkers.In2023,with320,000workers,thearts,literatureand
      media sector was by far the largest freelance sector in the UK2. In 2020, there were
      2.152millionone-personcompaniesinGermany.Threehundredandfifty-sixthousands
      ofthem(16.5%)werelocatedinacademicandtechnologicalservices,168thousandinthe
      information and communication industry, and 155 thousand in art, entertainment, and
      recreation. This means that taken together, there were 679,000 cultural freelancers that
      accounted for 31.6% of Germany’s one-person companies4.
        Freelanceworkersmanagethemselvesandexploitthemselves.Onecaninterprettheir
      strangeclassstatusontheonehandbysayingfreelancersareparticularlypronetoshare
      neoliberal management ideology. On the other hand, one can also interpret their class
      status by saying that freelancers are particularly prone to embrace the notions of the
      commons and self-managed companies that transcend capitalism. Perhaps both inter-
      pretations are true and false at the same time. Digital knowledge workers who are
      freelancersembracetheideaofself-management,whichcantakeontwoforms,namely
      (a)capitalistself-managementintheformoffor-profitfreelancecompaniesthatembrace
      capitalaccumulationandprivatepropertyand(b)socialistself-managementintheformof
      not-for-profit companies that embrace the commons and collective ownership.
        The antagonism between the networked digital productive forces and the digital
      relations of production has resulted in the dominance of a variety of digital capitalist
      corporations that together control a significant share of global profits. Digital capital’s
      Power (digital potestas) has again and again been challenged by socialist forms of
      production such as platform co-operatives, Creative Commons, Wikipedia, Diamond
      OpenAccess,not-for-profitInternetplatforms,publicserviceInternetplatforms,etc.(see
      Fuchs 2021, 2024) that have the potential to be and become important digital class
      struggleprojects,aspectsofdigitalpotentiaaspoliticallyorganiseddigitallabour.Digital
      socialism is a power movement, a digital potentia that challenges digital capitalism
      (Fuchs 2020).                                          
        Intheestablishmentofalternativestothecapitalistdigitalgiants,creatingthesoftware
      infrastructure needed is neither difficult nor expensive. In the digital media landscape,
      consumersareproducersofinformation,andithasbecomerelativelyeasyforeveryoneto
      establishnewmeansofproduction.Whiletraditionallyitwasdifficultandexpensiveto
      establish a new radio or television station or newspaper, it is neither complicated nor
      difficult nor expensive to create your own podcast, YouTube channel, blog, or Internet
      platform.Thedigitalmeansofproductionaremoreeasilyaccessibleandproduciblethan
      thetraditionalmeansofproduction,etc.Thereis,however,ashiftofpowerawayfromthe
      control of themeans ofcommunication asa means ofproductiontowards thepower of
      attention and visibility. Platforms such as YouTube, Google, TikTok, WhatsApp, In-
      stagram,andFacebookaresowidelyusedandhelptoaccumulatedigitalcapital.Thesix
      platformsjustmentionedareamongthe15mostaccessedInternetplatformsintheworld3.
      They are owned by three of the world’s largest transnational digital corporations (Meta
      Platforms: WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook; Alphabet: YouTube, Google; ByteDance:
      TikTok).Thesethreecorporationshaveincommonthattheyprimarilyderiveprofitfrom
      digital advertising (see Fuchs 2024).                  
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1724                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
        Anyone can today create a new Internet platform, but the difficulty lies in attracting
      userstoit.Digitalcapital’sPower(digitalpotestas)–itsprofitsandmonopolycharacter–
      hastodowiththeattentionandvisibilitythatdominantdigitalplatformsenable.Butthe
      Powerofdigitalcapitalisbasedonthepoweroftheuserstogiveattentiontoandmake
      visible digital content on the Internet. This means that users whose attention is an im-
      portantresourceandmeansofproductionhavethepowertoboycottdigitalcapital.Inthe
      case of advertising-financed platforms, a user boycott is a digital labour strike (Fuchs
      2021, 2024). Without users, Google’s and Meta’s capital accumulation collapses. The
      establishmentandstrugglefordigitalcapitalismontheonehandfacesdigitalmonopolies
      as a hindrance and problem that keeps alternatives from growing. On the other hand,
      digital labour struggles have the power to block digital capital. As a consequence, the
      establishmentofalternative,not-for-profitdigitalcommonsprojectsshouldbeintegrated
      withdigitallabourstruggles.Forexample,digitalplatformworkerswhogoonstriketo
      demandhigherwagesandbetterworkingconditionsareanidealsubjectforprojectsthat
      arebasedonaswitchofdigitallabourtoanot-for-profit,socialised,union-basedplatform
      co-operative that competes with digital capital.       
        Not-for-profitdigitalprojectsthattakeonformssuchasCreativeCommons,platform
      co-operatives, public service Internet platforms, digital commons, etc. have the digital
      potentiatochallengedigitalcapital’sPower.Todoso,theyneedtobeandbecomepartof
      digital class struggles, new forms of (digital) strikes that blur the boundaries between
      labour protests/consumer protests, the labour movement/the consumer protection
      movement, socialist advocacy/privacy advocacy, etc.    
        InSpinoza’stime,societieswereagriculturalsocieties,whichmeansthatlandwasthe
      mostimportantmeansofproduction.‘Thusthelandandwhateverisfixedtoitintheway
      we have described is especially the public property of the commonwealth, that is, of all
      thosewhobytheirunitedstrengthcanclaimit,orofhimtowhomallhavedelegatedthe
      powertoclaimit’(Spinoza1675–1677/2002,716).WecanonlyspeculateonhowSpinoza
      would have argued about the digital means of production as an economic resource. Ex-
      trapolating his idea ofthe commongoodto21st-centurydigital capitalism implies thata
      commonwealth requires the commonalisation of digital infrastructures such as Internet
      platforms so that digital platforms and information are no longer private goods yielding
      profits for the capitalist class but common goods. In such a system, ‘the production of
      commodities by means of commodities’ (de Peuter and Dyer-Witheford 2010, 44) is re-
      placedbythe‘circulationofthecommon’thatconnects‘eco-social,labour,andnetworked
      commonstoreinforceandenableoneanother’(dePeuterandDyer-Witheford2010,45).
        For Toni Negri, the emergence of what he terms immaterial labour means ‘that the
      producer(theworkerorproletarian,intellectualormateriallabour-power)reappropriated
      the tool of production, which increasingly is called the brain’ (Negri 2003, 144). Negri
      (2019)arguesthatwhattakesplacetodayinthedigitalmedialandscapeistheworkers’
      appropriationoffixeddigitalcapital:‘Whenweseetoday’syoungpeopleabsorbedinthe
      commons,determinedbytheirmachinicengagementsincooperation,wemustrecognise
      that their very existence is resistance. Whether we are aware of it or not, they produce
      resistance’(Negri2019,213).Negriistoooptimistic.Thereisnoautomaticresistanceof
      digitalworkersagainstdigitalcapital.Thedigitalmeansofproductionanddigitallabour

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1725     
                                                             
                                                             
      havepowerpotentialsforresistance(digitalpotentia)thatareonlyrealisedandactivated
      through and in class struggles and social struggles. Only in so far as digital labour
      struggles emerge, digital capital is questioned and opposed.
                                                             
      VIII Conclusion                                        
      This paper asked: How can Spinoza help us to better understand digital capitalism?
      Spinozahasnotdirectlytheorisedclass.Attemptstocreateindirectconnectionsbetween
      Spinoza’sphilosophyandtheanalysisofcommunicationincapitalismhave,forexample,
      taken Spinoza’s notions of the communication of bodies, imagination, and freedom of
      speechasastartingpoint.Itwaspointedoutthatsuchconnectionsarefar-fetched.Inorder
      to theorise digital capitalism with Spinoza, we need to update Spinoza via Marx and
      Negri.                                                 
        IsuggestedthattheanalysisofdigitalcaptialismshouldfocusonSpinoza’sanalysisof
      poweraspotestasandpotentiathatAntonioNegrihasforegroundedinsomeofhisworks.
      Inthecapitalisteconomy,thedominantpowerofcapitalthatisexertedfromabove(Power
      with ‘P’) in the form of accumulation processes and commodification is produced and
      reproduced by the power of the working class from below (power with ‘p’). Marx has
      analysedthedialecticofeconomicPowerandpowerincapitalismbyarguingthatlabour
      andtheworkingclassareatthesametimegeneralpovertyandthegeneralpossibilityof
      wealth.Theconsequenceisthatwemustthinkofcapitalismnotjustintermsofcapital
      structuresbutalsointermsoflabourpracticesthataredialecticallymediated.Giventhe
      poweroftheworkingclassincapitalism,thereisnoautomatismofresistancetocapital
      butalwaysthepowerpotential thatworkersgoonstrike,opposeandovercomecapital.
        ThedialecticofeconomicpowerandeconomicPowertakesonspecificformsindigital
      capitalism. Digital labour produces digital capital. There is no digital capital without
      digitallabour.Digitalcapitalisdigitalpotestas,economicPowerinthedigitalcapitalist
      economy that is imposed on workers, consumers, citizens, and society from above.
      Digitalpotestasdominatesandexploitsdigitalpotentia,thatis,digitallabour’spotentials.
      Digital capital is a form of exploitation and domination, a political economy that con-
      stitutes and governs the class relation between the owners and organisers of the digital
      meansofproductionandthosewhoasdigitalworkersproduceandputtousethesemeans
      of production in order to create digital commodities. Analysing digital capitalism in a
      Spinozist–Marxian–NegrianwaymeansstressingthatthePowerofdigitalcapital(digital
      potestas), that is, the accumulation of digital capital, is the product of digital labour
      (digital potentia).                                    
        Digital labour includes a variety of social forms such as extractive digital labour,
      industrial digital labour, digital knowledge labour, digital service labour, and digital
      disposallabour.Labourispotentiabecauseitconstantlyrealiseseconomicpotentialsthat
      as constant work result in use-values and as abstract labour produce commodities.
      Economicpotentialsareturnedintocapitalistactualitiesintheformofcommodities’use-
      values,values,andexchange-values.Digitallabourasdigitalpotentiaproducesavariety
      and different forms of digital commodities and digital capital. This means that digital
      potentia produces digital potestas.                    
                                                             

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1726                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
        Given that Spinoza advances a materialist monism and opposes substance dualism,
      digital knowledge labour is a more suited and more Spinozist term than immaterial
      (digital)labour.Theanalysisoftheantagonismbetweendigitallabouranddigitalcapital
      astheantagonismbetweendigitalpotentiaanddigitalpotestasissuperiortothedualist
      category of immaterial labour that, other than Spinoza’s materialist monism, separates
      ideasfromphysicality.Digitallabourisnotpartofanimmaterialworkingclassbutofthe
      working class’ faction of knowledge workers.           
        Although conceptually confusing,HardtandNegri’s notionofimmateriallabour
      pointsinanimportantdirection,namelytheimportanceoffocussingonhowcapital
      incontemporarycapitalismmanagesworkers’emotionsandaffects.Digitalpotestas
      ascapitalistmanagementformtargetsdigitallabour’semotions,feelings,minds,and
      affects. Digital capitalist management is among other things also affectual man-
      agement. Digital knowledge labour is associated with the brain as general intellect
      andmeansofproduction,thehighaffectivityoflabour,andthetranscendenceofthe
      boundariesbetweenproduction/consumption,labourtime/leisuretime,office/home,
      alienation/fun,labour/play,pain/pleasure,etc.Digitalknowledgelabourisatypeof
      labour that has been highly targeted by digital capital’s new management strategies
      that try to create more surplus value by trying to manipulate workers’ affects and
      integrate workers’ entire subjectivity, including their affects, emotions, and minds,
      into the labour process. As a consequence, many digital knowledge workers are
      highly paid workers and socially poor individuals who work long hours and have
      poor work-life balance.                                
        Digital capitalism is based on an antagonism between digital labour and digital
      capital, an antagonism between the digital class relations of production and the
      networkeddigitalproductiveforces,andanantagonismbetweendigitalcommodities
      and the digital commons. Digital capitalism has not just advanced new forms of
      exploitationbutalsonewpotentialsforthedevelopmentofworking-classpotentiain
      the form of digital working-class struggles and digital commons projects that
      question,oppose,andtranscenddigitalcapitalanddigitalcapitalism.Digitalworking
      class potentia does not emerge automatically. It is a mere potential for resistance to
      digital capital that needs to be activated in and through class struggles and political
      organisation.                                          
        Not-for-profitdigitalprojectsthattakeonformssuchasCreativeCommons,platform
      co-operatives, public service Internet platforms, digital commons, etc. have the digital
      potentiatochallengedigitalcapital’sPower.Todoso,theyneedtobeandbecomepartof
      digital class struggles, new forms of (digital) strikes that blur the boundaries between
      labour protests/consumer protests, the labour movement/the consumer protection
      movement,socialistadvocacy/privacyadvocacy,etc.Thedigitalmeansofproductionand
      digitallabourhavepowerpotentialsforresistance(digitalpotentia)thatareonlyrealised
      and activated through and in class struggles and social struggles.
        Spinoza’s philosophy is a fruitful inspiration for the critical analysis of digital cap-
      italism.Thefocusonhisnotionofpowerisjustoneofthepromisinglinesofthinking.
      Other topics, such as, for example, Spinoza’s notion of ideology and the connections
                                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1727     
                                                             
                                                             
      betweenthephilosophiesofHegelandSpinozaarefurthertopicsthatpromiseinteresting
      and important foundations for future analyses of digital capitalism.
                                                             
      Declaration of conflicting interests                   
      Theauthor(s)declarednopotentialconflictsofinterestwithrespecttotheresearch,authorship,and/
      orpublication of thisarticle.                          
                                                             
      Funding                                                
      Theauthor(s)receivednofinancialsupportfortheresearch,authorship,and/orpublicationofthis
      article.                                               
                                                             
      ORCID iD                                               
      ChristianFuchs https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0589-4579  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
      1. Kalpokas(2021)arguesthat‘Spinoza’sideasonmonism,causalityandaffectiveinteractionsas
        the essenceof the realityof everything’(719)have gainednewimportance in the digitalage
        wherethereare‘complexagglomerationsinvolvingtheindividual,otheronlineusers,code,data,
        digitalsignals,devicesandgadgetsofvariouskindsandcommunicationsinfrastructure,allof
        themjointlybutonlyprecariouslysustainingakindofselfthatshouldbebetterconceivedofas
        post-human’ (704–705), which would make the combination of Spinoza’s thought and post-
        humanistphilosophyimportant.Finelli(2021)stressesthatSpinoza’sEthicsconnectsbodyand
        mindandestablished‘amaterialistic-corporealconceptionofthedistinctionbetweengoodand
        evil’ and a ‘materialistic ethics of feeling’ (18) that considers good what increases human
        feelingsofhappinessandbadwhatincreaseshumanfeelingsofsadness.Hearguesthattherise
        ofdigitaltechnologieshasbroughtaboutthethirdgreattransformationofsociety.Accordingto
        Finelli,thistransformationhas,however,beenaccompaniedbytheriseofadigitaltechnological
        determinism,anideologythatclaimsthattheworldcanbereducedtocomputationandwhere
        ‘humanintelligenceitselfisconsideredasacomputationalmachine’(20).Spinoza,Finellisays,
        gainsnewimportanceforchallengingthisideologybecauseheremindsusthatknowledgeisnot
        digitaldatabutemergesfrominformation,includingdigitaldata,whenitis‘deeplyconnected
        with feeling’ (21).                                  
      2. Data source: https://www.statista.com/statistics/711419/united-kingdom-freelancing-
        professionals-type-of-work/, accessedonJanuary3,2024.
      3. Datasource: https://www.similarweb.com/de/top-websites/,accessed onOctober 7,2024.
      4. Data source: https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Arbeit/Arbeitsmarkt/Erwerbstaetigkeit/
        Tabellen/EWT-Corona-Betriebsgroesse.html,accessed onJanuary3,2024.
      References                                             
      Balibar,E´. 2008. SpinozaandPolitics. London:Verso.    
      Balibar,E´.2012.“Spinoza’sThreeGodsandtheModesofCommunication.”EuropeanJournalof
         Philosophy20(1): 26–49.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0378.2012.00511.x
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      1728                         Philosophy and Social Criticism 51(10)
                                                             
                                                             
      Balibar, E´., Ted Stolze, and Emilia Giancotti. 1989. “Spinoza, the anti-Orwell: The Fear of the
         Masses.”Rethinking Marxism2 (3): 104–139.https://doi.org/10.1080/08935698908657878
      Boltanski,L.,andE` Chiapello.2005. TheNew Spiritof Capitalism.London: Verso.
      Chan, J., M. Selden, and N. Pun. 2020. Dying for an iPhone. Apple, Foxconn, and the Lives of
         China’sWorkers. Chicago, IL:Haymarket.              
      dePeuter,G.,andN.Dyer-Witheford.2010.“CommonsandCooperatives.”Affinities:AJournalof
         RadicalTheory,Culture,andAction 4(1): 30–56.        
      Finelli,R.2021.“Marx,SpinozaandtheNewTechnologies.”InternationalGramsciJournal4(2):
         3–24.https://ro.uow.edu.au/gramsci/vol4/iss2/4/     
      Foucault,M. 1977.Discipline andPunish.NewYork:Vintage. 
      Foucault,M.1980.Power/Knowledge:SelectedInterviewsandOtherWritings,1972-77.Brighton:
         Harvester.                                          
      Fuchs,C. 2014.Digital LabourandKarl Marx.NewYork: Routledge.
      Fuchs,C. 2015.CultureandEconomy in theAge ofSocial Media. NewYork:Routledge.
      Fuchs,C.2017.“RaymondWilliams’CommunicativeMaterialism.”EuropeanJournalofCultural
         Studies 20(6): 744–762. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549417732998
      Fuchs,C.2020.CommunicativeSocialism/DigitalSocialism.tripleC:Communication,Capitalism
         &Critique 18(1): 1–31. Available at:https://doi.org/10.31269/triplec.v18i1.1144
      Fuchs,C. 2021.Social Media: ACritical Introduction.3rd ed. London:Sage.
      Fuchs,C. 2022.Digital Capitalism.London:Routledge.     
      Fuchs,C.2023.“TheProblemsofBase/superstructureandIdeologyintheWorksofStuartHall,
         GeorgLuka´cs,andRaymondWilliams.”TheCommunicationReview,OnlineFirst.https://doi.
         org/10.1080/10714421.2023.2242068                   
      Fuchs,C. 2024.Social Media: ACritical Introduction.4th ed. London:Sage.
      Gill,R.2007.TechnobohemiansortheNewCybertariat?NewMediaWorkinAmsterdamaDecade
         afterthe Web. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures.
      Habermas,J.1991.TheStructuralTransformationofthePublicSphere.AnInquiryintoaCategory
         ofBourgeois Society. Cambridge, MA:MITPress.        
      Hardt, M. 1991. “Translator’s Foreword.” In The Savage Anomaly. The Power of Spinoza’s
         Metaphysics and Politics, edited by A. Negri. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
         Press, xi–xvi.                                      
      Hardt,M.,andA.Negri.1994.LaborofDionysus.ACritiqueoftheState-Form.Minneapolis,MN:
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
      Hardt, M.,andA.Negri. 2000. Empire.Cambridge, MA:Harvard University Press.
      Hardt,M.,andA.Negri.2004.Multitude.WarandDemocracyintheAgeofEmpire.NewYork:
         Penguin.                                            
      Hardt,M.,andA.Negri.2009.Commonwealth.Cambridge,MA:TheBelknapPressofHarvard
         University Press.                                   
      Hardt, M.,andA.Negri. 2017. Assembly.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Hegel,G.W.F.2010.The Scienceof Logic.Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
      Kalpokas, I. 2021. “Towards an Affective Philosophy of the Digital: Posthumanism, Hybrid
         AgglomerationsandSpinoza.”PhilosophyandSocialCriticism47(6):702–722.https://doi.
         org/10.1177/0191453720916522                        
                                                             

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Fuchs                                         1729     
                                                             
                                                             
      Lazzarato,M.1996.“Immaterial Labor.”InRadicalThoughtinItaly,editedbyP.VirnoandM.
         Hardt, 132–146. Minneapolis, MN:University of Minnesota Press.
      Lipietz,A.1987. MiragesandMiracles. TheCrises of GlobalFordism. London:Verson.
      Marx,K.1857/1858. Grundrisse.London: Penguin.          
      Marx,K.1867.Capital Volume 1.Princeton, NJ:PrincetonUniversity Press.
      May,M.S.2009.“SpinozaandClassStruggle.”CommunicationandCritical/CulturalStudies
         6 (2): 204–208. https://doi.org/10.1080/14791420902867948
      Mosco,V.,andC.McKercher.2009.TheLaboringofCommunication.WillKnowledgeWorkersof
         the WorldUnite?Lanham, MD:Lexington.                
      Negri, A.1991a. MarxbeyondMarx. Lessonsonthe Grundrisse. NewYork:Autonomedia.
      Negri, A. 1991b. The Savage Anomaly. The Powerof Spinoza’s Metaphysics and Politics. Min-
         neapolis,MN:University ofMinnesota Press.           
      Negri, A.2003. Timefor Revolution.NewYork: Continuum.  
      Negri, A. 2004. Subversive Spinoza: (Un)contemporary Variations. Manchester: Manchester
         University Press.                                   
      Negri, A.2017. Spinoza: ThenandNow. EssaysVolume 3.Cambridge: Polity.
      Negri, A. 2019. “The Appropriation of Fixed Capital: a Metaphor?” In Digital Objects, Digital
         Subjects:InterdisciplinaryPerspectivesonCapitalism,LabourandPoliticsintheAgeofBig
         Data,editedbyD.ChandlerandC.Fuchs,205–214.London:UniversityofWestminsterPress.
         https://doi.org/10.16997/book29.r                   
      Qiu,J.L.2017.GoodbyeiSlave.AManifestoforDigitalAbolition.Champaign,IL:Universityof
         Illinois Press.                                     
      Read,J.2022.The Production of Subjectivity.Leiden:Brill.
      Read,J.2024.The DoubleShift. Spinoza andMarxonthePolitics of Work.London:Verso.
      Spinoza,B.de.1675-1677/2002.PoliticalTreatise.InM.L.Morgan(Ed.),SpinozaCompleteWorks
         (pp.676–754).Indianapolis,IN: Hackett.              
      Spinoza,B.de.1677/2002.Ethics.InM.L.Morgan(Ed.),SpinozaCompleteWorks(pp.213–382).
         Indianapolis,IN:Hackett.                            
      Spinoza,B. de. 2002.In: M.L. Morgan(ed). Complete Works.Indianapolis, IN:Hackett.
      Thalheimer, A. 1928. “Die Klassenverha¨ltnisse und die Klassenka¨mpfe in den Niederlanden zur
         ZeitSpinozas.”InSpinozasStellunginderVorgeschichtedesDialektischenMaterialismus,
         editedbyA.ThalheimerandA.M.Deborin,11–39.Vienna:VerlagfürLiteraturundPolitik.
      Tronti, M.2019. Workers andCapital.London:Verso.       
      Weber,M.1978. EconomyandSociety.Berkeley,CA: University of California Press.
      Williams,R. 1977. MarxismandLiterature.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             