[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Article                                                
                                                             
                                         PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
                                         2024,Vol.50(1)125–140
      The  theory of the public sphere                       
                                         ©TheAuthor(s)2023   
                                         Articlereuseguidelines:
      as a cognitive theory of modern    sagepub.com/journals-permissions
                                         DOI:10.1177/01914537231203905
      society                            journals.sagepub.com/home/psc
      Hans-Jo¨rg Trenz                                      
      ScuolaNormaleSuperiore,Italy                           
                                                             
                                                             
      Abstract                                               
      The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere is a key contribution to political
      philosophy,mediahistory,democratictheoryandpoliticaleconomy–publishedalmost
      60yearsago–thatleftadeepimprintontheprocessofdemocraticconsolidationofthe
      Federal Republic of Germany. At the same time, the Habermasian model of the public
      spherewasusedtotestoutthepossibilitiesofdemocratisationbeyondthenation-state.
      The theory of the public sphere was, however, mainly discussed as a contribution to
      normative political theory and, as such, the applicability of its normative standards re-
      mained contested. In this article, I focus instead on a second sociological reading of
      Habermas’theoryofthepublicsphereasanexplorationofthecognitivefoundationsof
      modern society. The relevance of this approach can be shown in an exemplary way by
      discussing the functioning of publicity, which, by creating social visibility and facilitating
      publicopinionformation,ontheonehand,providestheknowledgebaseofasharedsocial
      worldand,ontheotherhand,becomesthemaindriverofsocialchangethroughcritical
      self-reflection.Thearticlegoesontotakealookatrecentpublicspheretransformations
      inthecontextofdigitalisationandglobalisation,andarguesthatpublicsphereprinciples
      arebothunderminedandgainnewrelevancewhenfacingthechallengesofnewanddigital
      media.                                                 
      Keywords                                               
      communication, public sphere, publicity, democracy, Habermas
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Correspondingauthor:                                   
      Hans-Jo¨rgTrenz,FacultyofPoliticalandSocialSciences,ScuolaNormaleSuperiore,PalazzoStrozzi,Piazza
      degliStrozzi50123FirenzeItaly.                         
      Email:Hansjorg.trenz@sns.it                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      126                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      Cognition and publiccriticism:Thehistory ofthe concept ofthe
      public sphere                                          
      ThenotionofthepublicsphereisdeeplyrootedinGermanideologicalthought.Looking
      backat60yearsofHabermas’StructuralTransformationofthePublicSphere,onecannot
      help but notice how the critical reading of the public sphere by scholars from different
      disciplineshasalwaysbeencloselyrelatedtothehistoryofdemocratisationoftheFederal
      Republic of Germany, its critical distance to the past and its future orientation as a
      democratic nation-state within a united Europe.1 Still in the spirit of ‘critical theory’,
      Habermas’ starting assumption in his habilitation thesis was the colonisation of the
      bourgeois public sphere, which he saw as growing into the realm of consumption, thus
      becomingapolitical,inordertosimultaneouslydisseminateideologyandsuppresspublic
      reasoning.2SuchaMarxistcritiqueofmediacapitalismandconsumptionwasenvoguein
      the sixties and seventies. It explained how the media and its products took commodity
      form, which in turn had an ideological impact on ‘false consciousness’, and how such
      processes were controlled by the culture industries in close cooperation with the ruling
      classes. Accordingly, the culture-consuming public sphere was described no longer as
      opinion-forming but as consciousness-altering. It aimed not at the formation of the in-
      dividualasaself-determiningpoliticalsubject,butatmassconsumption.3Modernmass
      media publicity, the critique argues, ischaracterised by the monopoly of producers, the
      passivityofaudiencesandthecommodificationofcontentforprivateprofit.Inthisearly
      work, as Habermas himself acknowledges in a new preface to the 1990 reissue, the
      influenceofAdornoandHorkheimer’stheoryofmassculturewasstillevident.4Asearly
      as 1962, however, Habermas also recognised the potential for emancipation of the
      democratic public sphere.5 In a thoroughly forward-looking way, Habermas directs his
      attentiontothetransformationoftheliberalconstitutionalstateintoasocialconstitutional
      state, and thus to the need for broader social involvement of organised actors and as-
      sociations, that is, to the expansion of civil society structures.6 Here, the possibility of
      redemocratising the public sphere of domination (‘vermachtete O¨ffentlichkeit’) was
      indicated,whichwasactuallytriggeredbythesocialmobilisationsofcivilsocietyinthe
      late sixties and seventies.                            
        In the reading of this epoch-making work, both system-critical and emancipatory
      strands of interpretation remain closely interwoven: a critical-Marxist tradition of ana-
      lysingtheideologyandpoliticaleconomyofthepublicsphereofmarkets,7aswellasan
      institutionalist tradition of assessing the performance of plural, representative, partici-
      patoryordiscursivepublicspheres,theirinfrastructures,institutionsandproceduresinthe
      contextofdemocraticopinion-formation.8Inhislaterwork,JürgenHabermascontributed
      in particular to the further development of the emancipatory model of the democratic
      public sphere. Exemplary for this are his considerations of the conditions of discourse
      drivensociallearningprocessesthroughwhichtherationalpotentialoftheEnlightenment
      unfolds and democratisation continues.9 The counter-model of a commodified mass-
      media public sphere, in turn, underwent an important correction in the way alternative
      market structures were taken into account and, above all, the role of the audience was
      revalued.10Inrecentmediaandcommunicationresearch,audienceresponseisnolonger
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          127     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      operationalisedasadependentvariable;instead,theaudienceisonceagainassignedthe
      active role it has played since the Enlightenment.11 Political economy approaches of a
      commodified public sphere and institutional or cultural-theoretical approaches to a
      critically reflexive public sphere should, therefore, not be seen as mutually exclusive.
      Mutually dependent, they inspire each other and thrive off critical exchange.
        Finally,themodelofHabermas’publicspherehasbeenappliedtotheexplanationof
      thepotentialofdemocratisationbeyondthenational.12Here,again, Habermas provides
      major intellectual input. In his contribution to sociology of law ‘Between Facts and
      Norms’publishedin1992,Habermaspointstothepossibledetachmentoftheconceptsof
      publicsphereandcivilsocietyfromtheirfixationonthestate.Suchanembeddingofthe
      publicsphereinthestatewasstilltacitlyassumedinanencyclopediaarticlepublishedin
      1964:“Wespeakofapoliticalpublicsphere,incontrast,forinstance,totheliteraryone,
      whenpublicdiscussionsdealwithobjectsconnectedtotheactivityofthestate.Although
      stateauthorityis,sotospeak,theexecutorofthepublicsphere,itisnotpartofit(…)”.13
        Inthisearlyformulation,thepublicspherewasconceptualisedasamediatorbetween
      ‘society and the state’. Its democratic control function applies to state activities. Ac-
      cordingly,opinion-formationprocesseswereseenasbeingboundbythestate,sothatthe
      ‘public of the citizens of the state’ can represent the nation and exercise its task of
      controlling ‘state-organised rule’.14                  
        By contrast, in ‘Between Facts and Norms’, the public sphere is more generally
      describedasasoundingboardforproblemsthatneedtobedealtwithpolitically.15Such
      political signalling effects that speak to shared problems in need of collective solutions
      canthenalsounfoldinacontextinwhichthepublicauthoritytoresolvesuchproblemsis
      still insufficiently established, or must first be constituted. Civil society, in particular,
      becomes active where the state is ineffective or state intervention is undesirable. This
      opens up possibilities for reconstituting statehood or governing beyond the state, wit-
      nessed by its increasing relevance in theEuropean unification process.16 Consequently,
      thepublicsphereisnolongerbasedonstatestructures,butappearsfirstandforemostasa
      looseandnon-binding‘networkforthecommunicationofcontentandopinions’.Itisa
      ‘shared social space of communicative actions’ that is constituted through its own op-
      erationsthusnotpre-established.17Theaudience,too,isnolongerastateaudience,ora
      legally defined electorate, but rather the generalised addressee to put to the test the
      persuasive power of communicative actions.18           
        This nation-state detached definition of the public sphere is all the more interesting
      because it is receptive to a procedural understanding of the generation of political le-
      gitimacy that is applicable to international relations, traditionally conceived of as the
      realmofanarchy.19ItcanbesurmisedthatHabermaswasalreadyconcernedatthispoint
      with the problem of the democratic deficit in the European Union and the con-
      stitutionalisationofanewcosmopolitanworldorder;alltopicsthatappearedprominentin
      hispoliticalwritingsintheNinetiesandearly2000s.20Sharedworldsofunderstanding
      mayoftenbecondensedintonation-states,buttherelationsofmutualobservationreach
      beyondsuchstate-boundandculturallyconfinedspaces,andrelatetoaworldaudienceas
      the principal addressee of public reason and claims of generalised validity. Precisely
      becausephysicalpresenceisbecominglessandlessnecessaryinamass-mediatedpublic

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      128                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      sphere, audiences, readers or viewers can detach themselves from existing social or
      political spacesandareevenencouragedtodosobytheglobalculture industry.Topic-
      specific opinion formation, in particular, is increasingly taking place in a complex
      network ‘that branches out spatially into a multitude of overlapping international, na-
      tional, regional, communal, subcultural arenas’.21 Such multi-level public spheres are
      oftenfunctionallydifferentiatedandorganisearound thematic orpolicyareas, thusalso
      offering themselves as control instances of governance beyond the nation-state.22
        Finally, Habermas points out that political public spheres (like civil society) have
      empirical reference points and are not merely normative postulates.23 These factual
      relations facilitated by national and global communications, and the opinions that
      crystallise through these communicative exchanges as well as their effects on political
      legitimacyaretobeuncoveredbypoliticalscienceandmediastudies,buttheyalsoposea
      macrosociological challenge in the assumption of an interrelation between the public
      sphereandsocialchange.Theprocessoflegitimationandthepermanentdemocratisation
      facilitatedbythecommunicativeinfrastructuresofthepublicspheredonotonlyimpact
      on decision-making procedures, but also account for the integration of complex and
      anonymous societies. Therefore, public sphere theory cannot be reduced to democratic
      theory,butmustultimatelybeformulatedastheoryofsociety.Inthisway,thelong-term
      institutionalised processes of democratic legitimation can be related to the evolution of
      modernsociety.Thenormativevalidityofthepublicspherebecomes‘factual’intheway
      it shapes institutions, law and last but not least the attitudes and practices of demo-
      cratically minded citizens.                            
        In summary, public sphere theoryhas been interpretedprimarilyas acontribution to
      normative political theory and tested for its validity in changing political constellations
      (Fraser2007).Thenormativequestionofhowthepublicspherecontributestodemocracy
      wasthushighlightedoverthesociologicalquestionofhowthepublicsphereconstitutes
      modernsociety.Thislatteraspectofasociologyofthepublicsphereasacognitivetheory
      of modern society will be elaborated and evaluated in the following section.
      Public sphere as a building block of a theory of modern society
      Public sphere theory should not only be understood as a contribution to the normative
      theoryofdemocracy,butalwaysremainstiedbacktosocialtheory.Thislinkagebetween
      public sphere theory and sociological theory was already at the core of Habermas’
      ‘StructuralTransformation’.Inordertobeabletospeakofastructuraltransformationof
      the public sphere, we must acknowledge the structuring effects of communication in
      relationtosocialchange.Thisisnotsimplyamatterofredeemingdemocraticlegitimacy
      throughthestructuresofthepoliticalpublicsphere,thatis,thepublicsphereasatemplate
      fordemocraticpractice.Itisalsoaboutelaboratinganunderstandingoftheconstitutive
      dynamics of public discourse, which at the same time establish social order and drive
      socialchange.Democratisationandsocietalrationalisationcannotbereducedtothewill
      of political actors; they are also evolutionary, institutionally and sociostructurally em-
      bedded, and thus need to be understood as the ‘laws of the social’ that account for the
      dynamic unfolding of modern society.24                 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          129     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        ThemostelaboratechapterinHabermas’StructuralTransformationonthetopicofthe
      social-constitutive dynamics of the public sphere are his remarks in paragraph 13 on
      Immanuel Kant.25 Historically, the public sphere comes into play as a context for jus-
      tifyingsocialorder.AccordingtoKant,however,thesearenotsolelymoral-philosophical
      justifications,suchasthosecitedinHobbes’Leviathan.Rather,publicityunfoldsinthe
      individual and social practices of the public use of reason. This is the ‘method of en-
      lightenment’understoodnotonlyastheyardstickforthelegitimacyofstateorder,butalso
      as the regulator of interpersonal relations. Kant is sociologically reinterpreted here in
      terms of a theory of the rationalisation of social order and its moral foundations. The
      public use of reason is no longer the province of scholars alone, but becomes a social
      mandate: “The public sphere within which philosophers practice their critical craft is,
      however, notwithstanding its academic centre, not a merely academic one. Just as
      philosophers’ discussions take place in the face of government, (…) so, too, do they
      beforetheaudienceof‘thepeople,’toinstructthemtomakeuseoftheirownreason.”26
        AsHabermasfurtherelaborates,thepositionofthisaudienceisambiguous;ontheone
      hand,itisimmature,sinceitisnotyetenlightened,whileontheotherhand,itconstitutes
      itself in the public use of reason to claim its maturity. The public sphere thus simulta-
      neously enables the emancipation of society and creates social order by enabling indi-
      viduals,intheKantiansense,torelatetotherulesofmorality.Publicspheretheoryhere
      becomesthetheoryofintegrationofmodernsociety:‘Thedeliberatingaudienceof“men”
      constitutesitselfintothatof“citizens,”wherebyitcomestoanunderstandingaboutthe
      affairs of the “common being.”’27 For Kant/Habermas, civic society unfolds through
      discourse that makes public use of reason, and can legitimise itself on its own terms to
      provideforthecommongoodwithouthavingtobuildontranscendentalpremisesorpre-
      politicalfoundations.Societycanexistbecauseitcanrationallyjustifyitself,relyingon
      noauthoritiesoutsidethesocial.Apoliticallyfunctioningpublicspheregeneratessocial
      order, more specifically, a democratically constituted order.
        In order to pursue this programme further, a theory of society based on the use of
      languageisneeded.Thistheorymustsatisfythedemandsofbeingabletoexplainasocial-
      integrative dynamic inherent in public communication, and to derive its structuration
      effect. It is, therefore, no coincidence that Jürgen Habermas turned to an action- and
      communication-theoreticalfoundationofsociologyinhisnextmajorproject.Habermas’
      theory of communicative action can be understood as a translation of Kant’s socio-
      evolutionary reflections on the unfolding of public reason into a neo-Kantian commu-
      nicationtheoryofsociety.28Anticipatingthelaterdevelopmentofasociologyofpractice,
      thetheoryofcommunicativeactionisexplicitlybasedonashiftfromthetranscendenceof
      social order, often presupposed in classical sociological theories, to the communicative
      practicesofeverydaylife.Byfollowingthispragmaticunderstanding,theparticipantsin
      societal communications do not only constantly (re)produce the meaning structures of
      modern society; they also critically validate them and reflect on the desirability or un-
      desirabilityoftheirobservedeffects.Theoperationsofacriticalanalysisofsocietyare,so
      tospeak,takenupandcontinuedbytheparticipantsinsociety.Thiscapacitytoengagein
      public discourse develops over the course of societal rationalisation, which at the same
      timepromotesreflexivity,thatis,theabilitytocriticallyself-observeinordertomakethe

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      130                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      initiallyopaquestructuresofmeaningofthelifeworldtransparentfortheparticipants,to
      enablethemtojustifytheirchoicesandpreferencesand,atthesametime,totranslatethem
      into collective reasoning that guides future action.   
        To be able to reconstruct the evolution of modern society as a collectively practiced
      critiqueofreason,HabermasdrawsonthesymbolicinteractionismofMeadandSchützto
      demonstrate how the collective understandings that crystallise in the public flow of
      communication also constitute meaningfully structured life contexts, or shared life-
      worlds.29Thelifeworldthengenerallybecomesthe‘spaceofreason’30andoverlapsina
      peculiar way with the public sphere, which is often described as the ‘universe of dis-
      course’ or the ‘universe of public reason’.31 Communicative action takes place in the
      exchangeofreasons,andthushasastructuringeffect.Theactorsandinstitutionsinvolved
      in everyday exchanges of reasons move in the public sphere and make use of its in-
      frastructures. The public reasoning, however, also goes beyond the coordination of
      everyday action, enabling the coupling of the lifeworld and the system world, where
      power-andmarket-driven relations meet the demandsfor societal rationalisation. Here,
      too, the coupling of the different system levels presupposes the infrastructures of the
      publicsphere,whichallowsformarket-andpower-regulatinginterventions.Thepublic
      sphere, however, cannot be confined, as is sometimes erroneously argued, as a special
      case of consensus-building through the mechanism of public deliberation.32 If the de-
      liberativeexchangeofargumentsismerelyunderstoodasamechanismforthefabrication
      of consensus, such a technocratic reading of the public sphere would miss the binding
      forces of public discourse that do not derive from its achieved outcomes, but from the
      sharedcommitmenttoreasoninanopenandprincipallyinconclusivedebatethatconnects
      participants,ifnecessaryalsoacrossculturesandlanguages.Thisisalsowhythepublic
      sphere, as well as modern society on which it is built, cannot be reduced to existing
      language communities, for instance, in the emphatic sense of an ethnic or cultural na-
      tion.33 In classical sociology, the social bonds that distinguished modern anonymous
      society from community were identified early, for instance, in the discussion of the
      establishment of solidarity relations among strangers. Solidarity in modern societies
      differspreciselyinthewaymutualobligationsandresponsibilitiesarediscussedandcan
      claim validity between individuals who have no kinship relations and often face each
      other only as abstract subjects.34                     
        To develop a sociological understanding of the binding force of public discourse in
      relation to the socio-integrative dynamics of modern society, it is further necessary to
      reconsiderthespatialdimensionofthepublicsphere.Asiswellknown,thepublicsphere
      is‘sphere’or‘network’,notspace,whichiswhytranslationscommonlyusedinEnglish
      and French, such as public space or espace publique, are misleading.35 Nevertheless,
      publicsphere unfoldsinsocial space throughtheexercise ofcentrifugalandcentripetal
      forces. Both are closely related to the functional performances of the public sphere and
      mass media. Public sphere disperses communication and attentions while transcending
      boundaries. It creates a Babylon of languages through the multiplication of content in
      termsofwhatcanbesaidinpublicandhowitcanbeinterpreted.Thepublicspherecan
      oftenbeverynoisyanddiffuse.Atthesametime,italsocondensescommunication,filters
      opinions and crystallises the noise it generates into language and understanding. The

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          131     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      excitingthingisthatthepublicspherealwaysdoesboth,andthusexpandstheuniverseof
      understandingaccessiblethroughlanguage,puttingwhatcanbesaidintonewformsand
      making it accessible to ever-wider audiences.          
        Thesociety-shapingforceofthepublicsphereisalsooftendiscussedintermsofthe
      ‘impact of public opinion’, whereby ‘impact’ in empirical media studies is generally
      studiedincausalterms.Habermashimselfratherspeaksofa‘mentality-shapingimpact’
      ofpublicopinion.36Butwhatexactlyconstitutespublicopinionisnotsoeasytograsp;the
      ‘publishedopinion’inthemediaandthe‘surveyedopinion’ofpollsarerarelycongruent,
      andareoftensubjecttotension.Whatissaidandwhatisthoughtcanbefarapart;andin
      particular, in our times, it has become popular to diagnose a discrepancy between the
      published opinion in newspapers and public opinion.37 However, the precise measure-
      mentofpublicopinionisnotwhatmattersatall;rather,publicopinionresearchshouldbe
      concerned with processes of opinion formation and not with the possible ‘correct’ in-
      terpretationofanartifactthatcanalwaysbeobservedfromdifferentangles.Moreover,the
      public sphere is not simply the mirror of public opinion. Its performance stretches well
      beyondtheprocessesofopinionformationtoincludethepossibilityofreflexivityinthe
      modeofsecond-orderobservation,wherebytheavailableoptionsfortheconstitutionof
      ‘legitimate’ social and political order themselves become the meta-theme of public
      debatesandexchange.38Themediainfrastructuresprovidedviathepublicspheremakeit
      possibletocriticallyassessandquestionthe‘glimpses’ofopinionthatcrystalliseinthe
      mirrorofthepublicsphere:‘Peoplecancommentagainonwhattheyperceiveaspublic
      opinion’.Reflexivitythusmeans:onecanalsoargueaboutandagainstpublicopinionand
      does so with regularity.39 These reflexive performances, then, create a second-order
      observationofpublicopinion.Societynotonlyseesitselfinthemirrorofthepublic,but
      also describes what it sees andputs it into anarrative form ofself-description,with the
      underlyingnormsofenlightenmentprovidingguidance.Inthissense,valueconflictsare
      typicalmanifestationsofthenarrationsofsocietymadepossibleviathepublicsphere.40
        In Habermas’ latest writings, the public sphere refers to the special case of political
      communication for the purpose of opinion-forming and collective decision-making.41
      Thisimpliesnotsimplytheexchangeofreasonsinfreeandopendebate,butalsosome
      sortofpoliticalefficacythatrelatestothecollectiveofpoliticaldecision-making(Fraser
      2007).Thepublicsphereisbasedonargumentativeexchanges,butitisnot‘cheaptalk’,
      aspublicopinionneedstobetranslatedintoacollectivewillthatallowsdemocraticself-
      government.Accordingly,thepublicspherereferstotheproceduresofapplying,critically
      reviewingandselectingreasons.Inotherwords,thepublicsphereexistsinthedemocratic
      process.                                               
        However, it is precisely this performance, that is, a procedural narrowing of ‘good
      reasons’,thatisatstake,notonlyinprocessesofpoliticaldecision-making,butalsointhe
      processoftheself-constitutionofsociety.Theself-constitutingsocietyisalsoapolitical
      society,preciselybecauseitconfrontsthedemandstojustifythevalidityofitscollective
      decisions,and,moreover,needspublicityforitsoperationsinordertoensurethevisibility
      of its collective decisions and also of the ‘collective’ that underlies such decisions.42
        ThepointofHabermas’democraticand,consequently,alsoofhissocialtheoryisnow
      thedissolutionofthecollectiveofthosewhoareaffectedbycollectivedecisions.Since

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      132                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      such a collective can hardly materialise, it can only become a subject of public com-
      munication.Thecollectiveonlyexistsintherestrictedsensethatitistalkedaboutinthe
      public exchange of reasons. It is a reflection of public discourse, and, as such, is also
      facilitatedbythe‘reflexivity’ofsecond-orderobservationthatinvolvestheparticipantsof
      discourseandalltheiractualandpotentialaudiences.Preciselybecausesocietycannotbe
      foundedontheauthenticwillofanation(popularsovereigntyinthenarrowersense),and
      isneverthelessalwaysmorethanamerelyrandomgatheringofindividuals,itisformed
      throughtheidentification,discussionandresolutionofsharedproblems.Thisisprecisely
      whatdemocracymeans,whichthusprovidesthemechanismsandproceduresforsocietal
      self-constitution in the form self-government of matters of shared concern.
        Kantian-Habermasian social theory thus points to a political society, but not in the
      narrowsenseofapoliticallyorstate-preconstitutedsociety,butrathertoanopenhorizon
      that is approached by individuals who engage in a discourse about their shared un-
      derstandingofthepublicgood,constantlyinthefaceofnewproblemsthatareinneedof
      commonresolution.Inthisprocessoftheself-constitutionofapoliticalsociety,thepublic
      spherehasavisibility-generatingfunction,inthesenseofgeneratingattentionforshared
      problems and their possible solutions, but also in making the collective that engages in
      such a conversation visible. This adds to the classical definition of the principle of
      publicity in important ways: Society publicises itself, so to speak; it not only creates
      transparencyofitsownoperations,butalsomakesitselfvisibleforself-recognitionbyits
      own members (searching for an ethical self-understanding or the formulation of a col-
      lectiveidentity),andforrecognitionbyothers.Inpublicsphereparlance,wecouldalso
      concludethatsocietybecomesaddressable,bothbyitsownmembersandbyothers,asa
      collectivewithascribedpropertiesandresponsibilities.Yet,thereneverisafixedmeaning
      ofsocietyascollectiveethosoraggregatedinterestsofacollectionofindividuals(which
      could be described by cultural ‘thick description’ or statistically calculated). Society is
      realised only in the collective search for solutions to problems, precisely because the
      recognition of a ‘shared problem’ includes the naming of those affected and the dis-
      tributionofresponsibilities.InthepragmaticsenseofJohnDewey,societyismadeupof
      people affected by a common reference to a problem, but a public sphere is needed to
      create such a reference to a problem, to make it transparent (visible) and to initiate a
      process of problem-solving.43 In modern societies, all these processes run through
      democratic procedures and the institutions and collective actors (such as ‘electorates’)
      assignedtothem.Inthissense,thedemocraticprocessisascribednotonlyalegitimacy-
      generating force, but also a constituting force for the social. The democratic process of
      opinionandwillformationisthennotsolelyaboutlegitimatestateandgovernment,but
      about the visibility of society as a formula for the inclusion of those affected.
        Habermas speaks at one point of the ‘self-referential reproduction of the public
      sphere’.44 Legimitation is also a form of reflexivity by allowing for the critical self-
      observationofthepoliticalsocietythroughthepublicsphere,tokeepitsownnormsand
      objectivesconstantlypresentandapplythemtonewthematicareas.Popularsovereignty
      becomesapermanentprocedurebecausetheplaceofthebodyofthepeople,likethatof
      thebodyofthekingbefore,isvacated.Thereremainsonlythepermanent‘publictalk’to
      takeitsplace,whichis,atthesametime,morethanjust‘talk’sinceitistiedbacktothe

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          133     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      validity ofreasonsembedded inthelifeworld and theinstitutionsandlegal procedures
      that sustain them.                                     
        Accordingtothisreading,thediscoursetheoryofdemocracy,orpublicspheretheory,
      contributestogeneralsociologyor,morespecifically,thesociologyofthecognitiveorder
      ofmodernsociety.45Thisclosesacircleofargumentationthatishintedatinthechapteron
      ImmanuelKantin‘StructuralTransformation’asthepossibilityofapragmatictheoryof
      society, then systematically elaborated in the theory of Communicative Action into a
      theoryoflanguage,andfinallyanchoredinaproceduraltheoryofdemocracypresentedin
      ‘Between Facts and Norms’.                             
        Public sphere theory as a social theory, however, is capable of more than merely
      explaining the effects of publicity on the imagination of the collective of democracy; it
      also provides an understanding of social change as rationalisation. This, too, is already
      inherentinKant’ssocioevolutionaryreflectionsontheunfoldingofpublicreasons,andis
      translatedbyHabermasintoatheoryofcollectivelearning.Learninginthepublicsphere
      isanunfinishedprocessofcritiquewherebythepoliticallyconstitutedsocietyreflectson
      its own problem-solving insufficiencies and the inadequacies of the legitimate use of
      power, which is confronted with ever new challenges and reasons. Problems are never
      sufficiently described and solutions only insufficiently established, which is why the
      processofjustificationmustbekeptgoing,aprocessthroughwhichsocietynonetheless
      acts on itself, filters out patterns of justification, and thus forms structures of con-
      sciousness that can have a stabilising effect on the social order.
        Accordingly, the public sphere facilitates knowledge of the social world, and at the
      sametimegeneratesappliedknowledgeabouttheselfanditspositioningwithinsociety.
      Ascanbe seenfromtheeffectsofpublicityonthecreationofsocietal visibility andits
      translationintoopinion-andwill-formationprocesses,thepublicspheresimultaneously
      constitutes social order, and triggers social change that is driven by the normative
      criticism of that ‘existing order’. In the political public sphere, society legitimises and
      constitutesitself,notonlyas‘civilsociety’inthenarrowsense,butalsoasthesocietyof
      all the participants who can legitimately claim to be involved in shared problem for-
      mulationandsolution.Therationalisingpowerofthepublicspherecanneverbelimited
      tothenationalcommunityofbelonging;assuchalimitationwouldalwaysbetheobjectof
      criticismforbeingirrational,arbitraryornon-democratic.Thespacefortheexchangeof
      meaningthatisopenbythepublicspherecannotbeterritoriallyandculturallydelimited,
      even if there are some groups within the public sphere who try to establish such limi-
      tations.Itisconstitutedinsteadasanopen,andinthissense,‘public’sphere.Society,in
      turn,denotesthisspaceofmeaningfulexchangeofreasonwhereby‘meaningreferstoall
      content that can be discursively interconnected’. Habermas points out that such a uni-
      versalspace for theexchangeofreason isbynomeansutopian,butactually trivial and
      routine,perhapsjustastrivialasLuhmann’sworldsociety,which,afterall,derivesfrom
      similar considerations of the scope and connectivity of communication (in Habermas,
      however,conceivedintermsof‘communicativeunderstanding’).Forsociology,society,
      therefore,doesnotneedanysocialandculturalprerequisites,andactuallyonlyrelatesto
      theassumptionofongoingargumentativeexchangesthatallowparticipantstoconstruct
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      134                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      shared meaning, socialise as individuals and collectives, and become visible for them-
      selves and for others in the mirror of the public sphere.
                                                             
      Public sphere in crisis? Disruptions and resilience of democratic
      communication processes                                
      Finally,thequestionarisesastohowsuchaninterrelationofthemodernpublicsphereand
      democracy can be upheld in the context of digitalisation and globalisation. The con-
      temporarydigitaltransformationofthepublicsphereposesachallengetopublicopinion
      and will formation as filtered through the mass media. However, the evidence of dys-
      functions of media communications in no way implies that the digital society is in-
      compatiblewiththestructuresandfunctionsofthepublicsphere.46Onthecontrary,the
      concept of the public sphere seems to have gained in relevance for the sociological
      analysisofthedigitaltransformationsofsociety,andtheenhancedsocialandnormative
      struggles that accompany technological change.         
        Public spheres, according to Habermas, are a ‘demanding and therefore improbable
      evolutionary achievement of modern Western societies’.47 I would add to this that the
      dissolution of public spheres is also an unlikely event. Once the interplay between the
      modern public sphere,media andsocietyhas beenestablished, theactors involved init
      cannotsimplydecidetolimitpublicityortosuspendreasonThiscanbewellillustratedby
      thedilemma thatpopulistparties, ornewauthoritariangovernments,confrontwhen,on
      the one hand, they can run targeted campaigns, for example, via social media, to ma-
      nipulatereasons,but,ontheotherhand,theycannotescapethecriticaleyeofthepublic
      whichdemandsjustificationandholdsthemaccountable.Itis,therefore,nocoincidence
      that populists are often masters of media language. Their statements are meant to
      contribute to public reasons and justification, for instance, in the form of criticism of
      elites,orofthedominantinterpretationofscientificfacts.Theextenttowhichtheseforms
      ofpopulistcriticismaremanipulativeinterventions,orevenviolationsofproceduresfor
      the fair exchange of arguments can, in turn, be diagnosed and, if necessary, sanctioned
      throughtheengagementofcriticalpublicsandthemonitoringbymediaandjournalists.
        Similarly, we lack the imagination to think of a society without a public sphere.
      Modern society stands and falls with the public sphere, and even though securing its
      existence is a perpetual challenge and its performance is always deficient, there are no
      alternatives to this fragile constellation. Nevertheless, the complexity and thus also the
      fragility of the public sphere has increased to an alarming degree, which has created
      considerable uncertainties and tensions under current conditions of digitalisation and
      transnationalisation of the media.48 Habermas himself seems rather distrustful of the
      digital public sphere. Already in his 2009 statement, he joined the chorus of cy-
      berpessimistsandemphasisedtherisksofadispersionofattentionandfragmentationof
      the ‘mass public’, where debates were still centred around the same questions of rele-
      vance.49TheInternet,heargues,hasaprimarilycentrifugaleffect,andfailstosynthesise
      public opinion. This skepticism was expressed still at pre-social media times before
      Facebook,Twitterandothersshatteredpoliticalcommunicationanddemocracy.Looking
      atthedramaticchangesinonlinecommunicationoverthelastdecade,thelasthopesthat
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          135     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      so-calledinteractivemediacouldalsosupportdemocraticdeliberationhaveevaporated.50
      Habermas’ early intuition is confirmed in empirical analyses of online political com-
      munication.Personalopinionsareexchangedatbreakneckspeedindigitalnewsspaces,
      butoftenwithoutbundlingandcondensingintopublicopinion.Muchisspoken,evenless
      is understood. In addition to this centrifugalisation of the public sphere via communi-
      cation in spatially unbounded networks,51 the development of social media into the
      primary mass medium of our time has also unfolded a potential for the focalisation of
      attentionandmassmobilisationthatHabermasdidnotforesee.Socialmediacanindeed
      beoccupiedbypoliticalforcesfortargetedcampaignswithhighlytransformativeimpact
      on the direction of democratic politics, as illustrated by the Brexit referendum.52
        Inthewakeofthetransformationofdigitalandglobalisedmediaworlds,thediscourse
      ofthepublicsphereisregisteringashiftfrom‘critique’to‘crisis’,whichradicallycalls
      into question the functional conditions of the democratic public sphere, and heralds a
      socialupheavalinthedirectionofpost-democraticorders.Oftenoverlooked,however,is
      the fact that the ‘crisis’ itself can only be meaningfully interpreted and experienced
      throughthepublicdebatesandmobilisationsittriggered.Suchdebatesarealwaystobe
      understood as a search for collective responses, to test out the possibilities of reform,
      correctionorrenewal.Thepublicsphereanditsnormativeclaimsofvaliditycouldthus
      proveresilient,preciselyintimesofcrisis.Notonlydoespublicsphereresearchoperatein
      themodeofdiagnosisandcritiqueoftheunfulfilledpromiseofdemocracy,equalityand
      freedomfromdomination.53Mythesis,derivedfromtheprecedingconsiderationsonthe
      society-constitutive dynamicsofthepoliticalpublicsphere,isthat theseconflictsabout
      theconditionsofdemocracyinthedigitalandglobalagecanonlybeunderstoodunderthe
      assumptionthatthenormativetemplateofthemodernpublicsphereisstillheldvalidand
      applicable. Modern society in this sense persists in our ‘crisis-ridden’ present, and is
      perpetuated in the way it confronts the digital in a way to critically reflect its inherent
      contradictionsandinadequacies.Accordingtotheseconsiderations,thediagnosisofthe
      crisis of the public sphere always remains tied back to criticism and is experienced as
      such, not only by experts in public sphere research, but also by those involved in the
      communication process themselves. Such experiences of the crisis of the public sphere
      cancertainlybesurveyedempirically,forexample,instudiesofmediause,oroftheloss
      of trust in the media and democratic institutions and procedures.54 Crucial to my ar-
      gument, however, is that these experiences again become a driver of public criticism
      continually raising new claims to normative validity, for example, in the agenda of the
      reform of media infrastructures, in the debate about the truth content of news, or in
      measurestoimprovethediscursivequalityofsocialmediadebates.Bytransformingthe
      diagnosis of the crisis of the public sphere into critique, the normative template of the
      modernpublicsphereis,atthesametime,renewed,translatedintopoliticalprogrammes
      and applied to the challenges of the digital transformation of society.
        Inthiscontext,aprogrammeforsociologicalpublicsphereresearchwouldconsistof
      observing how societies change from a routine into a crisis mode, critically facing the
      challengesoftransnationalisationanddigitalisation,andhowthediscourseofa‘crisisof
      the public sphere’ in turn triggers public resonance and translates into social mobi-
      lisations. The diagnosis of a dystopian disruption of the media only gains relevance by

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      136                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      linking it back to the utopia of the democratic public sphere that continues to inform
      criticaldiscourse.ThisisnotmeantastherehabilitationoftheHabermasianmodelofthe
      publicsphere,butsimplyasanindicationthatitsnormativetemplatestillappliesforthe
      critical self-assessment of the transnational and digital society with regard to its own
      shortcomingsandpotential.Dystopia(thediagnosisofthedeficientpresence)andutopia
      (the prognosis of possible futures) remain strongly interrelated in the emerging trans-
      nationalanddigitalsocietythattestsoutitsownhorizonofpossibilitiesandlimitsforthe
      constitution of legitimate order.                      
      ORCID iD                                               
      Hans-Jorg Trenzhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-3479-7498  
                                                             
      Notes                                                  
                                                             
       1. Habermas1990[1962].Forthepurposeofthisarticle,wherenoEnglishtranslationisquoted,I
         provide my owntranslations fromoriginal Habermas publications inGerman.
       2. Ebd.,248f.                                         
       3. Habermas 1990[1962],252.                           
       4. Ebd.,29.                                           
       5. Müller-Doohm 2014,151–154.                         
       6. Habermas 1990[1962],338.                           
       7. Negt and Kluge 1972; Steinert 1998 See also Hans Magnus Enzensberger’s essays on the
         consciousness industry (Enzensberger 1962), published at the same time as Habermas’
         structural transformation.                          
       8. Gerhards andNeidhardt 1991;Peters 1994.            
       9. A theory of discourse-driven social learning processes is elaborated in the Theory of Com-
         municative Action, Habermas 1981;Eder 1985; Jasso2015.
      10. Onthispoint,seethethreerevisionstothestructuraltransformationofthepublicspherethat
         Habermas(1990[1962],21–33)elaboratesinhisnewpreface:theovercomingoftheseparation
         ofstateandsociety,thevalorisationofprivateautonomyandthusofthepublic’scapacityfor
         self-determination, andthe pluralisation ofpolitical culture andmedia.
      11. Neidhardt1994;Splichal2012;Warner2002.Inthiscontext,theinterpretivecapacitiesofthe
         audience have been highlighted in cultural studies, such as Stuart Hall’s (1973) encoding/
         decodingmodel of the reception of communication.    
      12. Eder 2013;Fraser 2007; Salvatore,Schmidtke, andTrenz2013.
      13. Habermas 1974,49.                                  
      14. ibid., 220f.                                       
      15. Habermas 1992,S. 435.                              
      16. Eder,Hellmann, andTrenz1998.                       
      17. Habermas 1992,436, emphasis inthe original.        
      18. Ebd.,S. 440.                                       
      19. Worldaudienceisbynomeansonlyaprojectionsurfaceofphilosophicaldiscourse.Ferdinand
         To¨nniesalreadyelaboratedthefundamentalworldorientationofjournalism,whichprocesses
         ‘world events’ for a ‘world audience’ (To¨nnies 2013 [1922], p. 85). Through its intrinsic
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          137     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         reference to globality, journalism is therefore never fully integrated in the nation-state, but
         alwaysreachesbeyondthestateinitsoperationsandinterpretations(Habermas1992,p.504ff.).
         ForHabermas,thisreferencetotheworldisredeemedbytheefficacyofuniversalclaimsto
         validityas apoint of referencefor critical publicity.
      20. Habermas 1995; Habermas 2004;Habermas 2011.        
      21. Habermas 1992,452.                                 
      22. Eder,Hellmann, andTrenz1998.                       
      23. Habermas 1992,S. 451.                              
      24. Seealso Gaus 2009,140–148.                         
      25. According to Habermas’ introductory remarks in the 1962 edition of the Structural Trans-
         formation (Habermas 1990[1962],53).                 
      26. Habermas 1990[1962],181.                           
      27. Ibid.183.                                          
      28. Habermas 2009,27.                                  
      29. Habermas 1981,volume 1,126–140,174–188.            
      30. Habermas 2012,19.                                  
      31. Grosse-Kracht 2009;Volkmer 2014.                   
      32. Peters 2002.                                       
      33. Siehebspw.Gerhards 1997.                           
      34. Bohman1998;2007.                                   
      35. Calhoun1992.                                       
      36. Habermas 2009a, 118.                               
      37. Manow 2020.                                        
      38. Trenz2005,91.                                      
      39. Habermas 2009,119, emphasis inthe original.        
      40. Eigmüller andTrenz2020.                            
      41. Habermas 2009.                                     
      42. Nassehi 2002.                                      
      43. Dewey1927.                                         
      44. Habermas 1992,626.                                 
      45. Gaus 2009;O’Mahony2013.                            
      46. BennettandPfetsch 2018.                            
      47. Habermas 2009a, 135.                               
      48. BennettandPfetsch 2018.                            
      49. Habermas 2009a, 110f.                              
      50. Dahlgren 2013.                                     
      51. vanDijk 2005; McNair 2006.                         
      52. Bossetta,Segesten,andTrenz2017;Bra¨ndle,Galpin,andTrenz2021;GalpinandTrenz2019.
      53. Aytac 2022.                                        
      54. Trenz2021.                                         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      138                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      References                                             
      Aytac,U.2022.“DigitalDomination:SocialMediaandContestatoryDemocracy.”PoliticalStudies0.
         doi:10.1177/00323217221096564.                      
      Bennett,W.Lance,andPfetsch,Barbara.2018.“RethinkingPoliticalCommunicationinaTimeof
         DisruptedPublic Spheres.”Journal of Communication68, no.2: 243-253.
      Bohman,James.1998.“TheGlobalizationofthePublicSphere.”PhilosophyandSocialCriticism
         24: 199-216.                                        
      Bohman,James.2007.DemocracyAcrossBorders:FromDeˆmostoDeˆmoi.Cambridge:MITPress.
      Bossetta, Michael, Segesten, Anamaria Dutceac, and Trenz, Hans-Jo¨rg. 2017. “Political partici-
         pation on Facebook during Brexit. Does user engagement on media pages stimulate en-
         gagement with campaigns?”Journalof Language &Politics 17,no. 2:173-194.
      Brunkhorst, Hauke. 2002. Solidarita¨t: von der Bürgerfreundschaft zur globalen Re-
         chtsgenossenschaft. Frankfurtam Main:Suhrkamp.      
      Bra¨ndle,VerenaK.,Galpin,Charlotte,andTrenz,Hans-Jo¨rg.2021.“Brexitas‘PoliticsofDivision’:
         Social Media Campaigning in the Aftermath of the Referendum”. Forthcoming in Social
         Movement Studies.                                   
      Calhoun,Craig, ed. 1992.Habermasandthe public sphere. Cambridge, MA:MITPress.
      Dahlgren, Peter. 2013. The Political Web: Media, Participation and Alternative Democracy.
         Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.                    
      Dewey, John.1927.The PublicanditsProblems. Chicago:GatewayBooks.
      Eder, Klaus. 1985. Geschichte als Lernprozess. Zur Pathogenese politischer Modernita¨t in
         Deutschland.Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.             
      Eder,Klaus.2003.“O¨ffentlichkeitundDemokratie.”InEuropeanIntegration,editedbyMarkus
         Jachtenfuchs, andBeateKohler-Koch,85-120.Opladen: Leske andBudrich.
      Eder,Klaus.2013.“StrugglingWiththeConceptofthePublicSphere.”InRethinkingthePublic
         Sphere Through Transnationalizing Processes. Europe and Beyond, edited by Armando
         Salvatore,OliverSchmidtke,andHans-Jo¨rgTrenz,25-55.Basingstoke:PalgraveMacmillan.
      Eder, Klaus, Hellmann, Kai-Uwe, and Trenz, Hans-Jo¨rg. 1998. “Regieren in Europa jenseits
         o¨ffentlicher Legitimation? Einer Untersuchung zur Rolle von politischer O¨ffentlichkeit in
         Europa.”Politische Vierteljahresschrift 29: 321-343.
      Eigmüller,Monika,andTrenz,Hans-Jo¨rg.2020.“ValueConflictsinaDifferentiatedEurope:The
         Impact of Digital Media on Value Polarization in Europe.” In Shared Values and Global
         Challenges, edited byLaura Leonardi.Bologna: IlMulino.
      Enzensberger, Hans-Magnus. 1962. Einzelheiten I, Bewussteins-Industrie. Frankfurt am Main:
         Suhrkamp.                                           
      Fraser, Nancy. 2007. “Transnationalizing the Public Sphere: On the Legitimacy and Efficacy of
         Public Opinionin aPost-Westphalian World.”Theory,Culture& Society 24,no. 4:7-30.
      Galpin,Chalotte,andTrenz,Hans-Jo¨rg.2019.“ParticipatoryPopulism:OnlineDiscussionForums
         on Mainstream News Sites During the 2014 European Parliament Election.” Journalism
         Practice13, no.7: 1-18.                             
      Gaus,Daniel.2009.DerSinnvonDemokratie.DieDiskurstheoriederDemokratieunddieDebatte
         überdie Legitimita¨t derEU.Frankfurt: CampusVerlag. 
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
      Trenz                                          139     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      Gerhards, Jürgen. 1997. “Diskursive versus Liberal O¨ffentlichkeit. Eine empirische Ausei-
         nandersetzungmitJürgenHabermas.”Ko¨lnerZeitschriftfürSoziologieundSozialpsychologie
         49,no. 1:1-34.                                      
      Gerhards, J., and Neidhardt, F. 1991. “Strukturen und Funktionen moderner O¨ffentlichkeit. Fra-
         gestellungen und Ansa¨tze.” In O¨ffentlichkeit, Kultur, Massenkommunikationn, edited by S.
         Müller-Doohm, andK.Neumann-Braun Munich:Oldenbourg. 
      Grosse-Kracht, Herrmann. 2009. “Offene Fragen im Universum o¨ffentlicher Gründe: Jürgen
         Habermas und die O¨ffentlichkeitsansprüche der Religionen.” In Moderne Religion? : theo-
         logische und religionsphilosophische Reaktionen auf Jürgen Habermas, edited by Knut
         Wenzel,andThomas M.Schmidt.Freiburg:Herder.         
      Habermas,Jürgen.1974.“ThePublicSphere.AnEncyclopediaArticle.”NewGermanCritique3:
         49-55.                                              
      Habermas, Jürgen. 1981. Theorie des Kommunikative Handelns, Vol. 2. Frankfurt am Main:
         Suhrkamp.                                           
      Habermas, Jürgen. 1990 [1962]. Strukturwandel der O¨ffentlichkeit. Untersuchungen zu einer
         Kategorieder bürgerlichen Gesellschaft.Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.
      Habermas,Jürgen.1992.Faktizita¨tundGeltung.Beitra¨gezurDiskurstheoriedesRechtsunddes
         DemokratischenRecthsstaats.Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.
      Habermas, Jürgen. 1995. “Remarks on Dieter Grimm’s ‘Does Europe Need a Constitution?”
         European LawJournal 1,no. 3:303-306.                
      Habermas, Jürgen. 2004. “Ist die Herausbildung einer europa¨ischen Identita¨t no¨tig, und ist sie
         mo¨glich?”In Dergespaltene Westen. Frankfurtam Main:Suhrkamp.
      Habermas, Jürgen. 2009a. “Hat die Demokratie noch eine epistemische Dimension? Empirische
         ForschungundnormativeTheorie.”InJPhilosophischeTexteVol.4.PolitischeTheorie,edited
         byJürgenv. Habermas.Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.     
      Habermas, Jürgen. 2009b. Philosophische Texte Vol. 3. Sprachtheoretische Grundlegung der
         Soziologie.Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.              
      Habermas, Jürgen. 2009c. Philosophische Texte Vol. 4. Politische Theorie. Frankfurt am Main:
         Suhrkamp.                                           
      Habermas,Jürgen.2009d.PhilosophischeTexteVol.2.Rationalita¨ts-undSprachtheorie.Frankfurt
         am Main:Suhrkamp.                                   
      Habermas,Jürgen. 2011.ZurVerfassungEuropas.Frankfurt amMain: Suhrkamp.
      Habermas,Jürgen.2012.NachmetaphysischesDenkenII:Aufsa¨tzeundRepliken.Berlin:Suhrkamp
         Verlag.                                             
      Habermas,Jürgen,andLuhmann,Niklas.1971.TheoriederGesellschaftoderSozialtechnologie:
         wasleistet die Systemforschung? Frankfurtam Main: Suhrkamp.
      Hall,Stuart.1973.EncodingandDecodingintheTelevisionDiscourse.CentreforCulturalStudies,
         University of Birmingham.                           
      Jasso, Julius. 2015. Intellektuelle Bürgerschaft: Modelle kritischer Lernprozesse bei Jürgen
         HabermasundPierreBourdieu.Marburg:Tectum Wissenschaftsverlag.
      Manow,Philip.2020.(Ent)demokratisierung der Demokratie.Berlin: Suhrkamp.
      McNair, Brian. 2006. Cultural Chaos. Journalism, News and Power in a Globalised World.
         London:Routledge.                                   
      Müller-Doohm, Stefan. 2014.JürgenHabermas. A Biography. Berlin: Suhrkamp.

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
      140                          Philosophy and Social Criticism 50(1)
                                                             
                                                             
      Nassehi, Armin. 2002. “Politik der Staates oder Politik der Gesellschaft. Kollektivita¨t als Prob-
         lemformel der Politischen.” In Niklas Luhmanns politische Soziologie, edited by Kai-Uwe
         Hellmann, andRainerSchmalz-Bruns, 38-59.Frankfurt amMain: Suhrkamp.
      Negt,Otto,andKluge,Alexander.1972.O¨ffentlichkeitundErfahrung.ZurOrganisationsanalyse
         bürgerlicher undproletarischer O¨ffentlichkeit.Frankfurt amMain: Suhrkamp.
      Neidhardt,Friedhelm.1994.“DieRollederPublikums.AnmerkungenzurSoziologiepolitischer
         O¨ffentlichkeit.” In Systemrationalita¨t und Partialinteresse. Festschrfit fü Renate Mayntz,
         edited byHans UlrichDerlien, UteGerhard,andFritz W.Scharpf,315-328. Baden-Baden:
         Nomos.                                              
      O’Mahony,Patrick. 2013.TheContemporary Theoryof thePublic Sphere.Peter Lang:Bern.
      Peters,B.1994.“DerSinnvonO¨ffentlichkeit.”InF.Neidhardt(Hrsg.),O¨ffentlichkeit,o¨ffentliche
         Meinung,soziale Bewegungen.Opladen: Westdeutcher Verlag.
      Peters, Bernhard. 2002. “Die Leistungsfa¨higkeit heutiger O¨ffentlichkeiten — einige theoretische
         Kontroversen.” In Imhof Kurt, and Jarren Otto (Hrsg), Integration und Medien. Medi-
         ensymposiumLuzern,vol.7,187-202. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
      Salvatore, Armando,Schmidtke, Oliver, andTrenz,Hans-Jo¨rg,eds. 2013.Rethinking the Public
         Sphere Through Transnationalizing Processes. Europe and Beyond. Basingstoke: Palgrave
         Macmillan.                                          
      Splichal,Slavko.2012.TransnationalizationofthePublicSphereandtheFateofthePublic.New
         York:Hampton Press.                                 
      Steinert,Heinz.1998. Kulturindustrie.Münster:Westfa¨lisches Dampfboot.
      Trenz,Hans-Jo¨rg.2005.EuropaindenMedien.Dieeuropa¨ischeIntegrationimSpiegelnationaler
         O¨ffentlichkeit.Frankfurt/New York: CampusVerlag.   
      Trenz, Hans-Jo¨rg. 2021. “Trust Through Media and Trust in Media: How is the Topic of Trust
         ApproachedinMediaandCommunicationResearch?”InTrustandDistrustinGovernance.A
         MultidisciplinaryAccount,editedbyChristianLahusen,InPreparation.London:Routledge.
      To¨nnies,Ferdinand. 2013[1922]. Kritik der O¨ffentlichen Meinung. Berlin:Springer.
      vanDijk,Jan. 2005.TheNetwork Society: Social Aspectsof New Media.London:Sage.
      Volkmer,Ingrid.2014.TheGlobalPublicSphere:PublicCommunicationintheAgeofReflective
         Interdependence.Cambridge: Polity.                  
      Warner,Michael. 2002.PublicandCounterpublics.NewYork: ZoneBooks.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             