[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:901–904       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00777-6            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Contested territory: a theory of land and democracy   
       beyond sovereign bounds                               
                                                             
       Anna Jurkevics Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2025, 284 pp., ISBN:
       9780198922926                                         
                                                             
       Alina Utrata1                                         
                                                             
       Published online: 12 August 2025                      
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Some questions, like small bricks, can sometimes topple buildings. In Contested
       Territory, Anna Jurkevics asks a question that wriggles a stone at the foundation of
       much of western political theory: what is the use of territorial sovereignty? In never
       forgetting the real significance of her inquiry, Jurkevics’s book is a refreshing explo-
       ration of what territory—and the traditional canon of political thought—might still
       offer those of us skeptical of territorial sovereigns and searching for a more anarchi-
       cal and localized politics.                           
         At the heart of Jurkevics’ contribution is an intervention aimed at cosmopoli-
       tan theorists, whose rejection of sovereignty she shares but whose arguments for
       initiatives such as ‘global governance, post-national federation, and the functional
       disaggregation of state sovereignty’ (p. 4) nevertheless trouble her in their impetus
       to centralize control and mastery over land. Her worry is that ‘cosmopolitans have
       thrown the baby (territory) out with the bathwater (sovereignty), so to speak, leaving
       themselves with little theoretical room to reconstruct an emancipatory approach to
       land’ (p. 18). For Jurkevics, territory is still a useful concept because territorially-
       based communities are the best vehicles for a thicker, richer democratic politics.
       ‘Communities that emerge from sharing land,’ she explains, ‘are the most promising
       sites of cosmopolitan democracy today’ (p. 19). By democracy, Jurkevics does not
       mean consensus politics, but the inherent messiness of local communities who must
       everyday contest, tolerate, and compromise among one another to build their shared
       worlds.                                               
         In theorizing this contested territory, Jurkevics both critiques the failings of tradi-
       tional conceptions of territory while also offering an alternative pathway for imag-
       ining our relationship with land and non-humans. In Part III, ‘Beyond Sovereign
       Bounds,’ for instance, Jurkevics narrows in on three aspects of territory she finds
       *                                                     
         Alina Utrata                                        
         alina.utrata@sjc.ox.ac.uk                           
       1 St John’s College, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3JP, UK
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       902                                        A. Utrata  
                                                             
       particularly harmful: mastery, exclusion, and exclusivity. One can see already how
       each of these small bricks lends itself to unsettling a foundational tenet of territorial
       sovereignty and the western canon, from Lockean provisos about mastery of land to
       the exclusionary bordering practices of sovereign states. As an alternative, Jurkevics
       draws from indigenous scholarship to provide ways of thinking about partnering
       with land and non-humans, rather than mastering it and them, noting that indigenous
       teachings often emphasize observing, mimicking, and deference to non-humans. For
       example, she recounts Heidi Kiiwetinepinesiik Stark’s writing on the Anishinaabe
       conception of treaty, ‘a living relationship that is guided by principles of respect,
       responsibility, and renewal’ (p. 212). Stark writes that in the Anishinaabe story of
       the marriage between a beaver and a human, the importance of respect for beavers
       does not require an end to killing and eating beavers, but rather emphasizes that it
       is only by respecting the conditions of their lives that will allow the Anishinaabe to
       continue to hunt and eat beavers in the long term. This concept of treaty, or ‘living
       relationship,’ is, as Jurkevics notes, a way of ‘sorting out our answer to the question:
       what is our responsibility in this place?’ (p. 214).  
         Thus, theorizing contested territory, Jurkevics argues, is partially about upend-
       ing the traditional canon’s grip on our thought, and to find ‘threads of an alterna-
       tive territorial imaginary—one scattered and suppressed by history’s victors—to see
       what it has to tell us about our relationship to land and how we might change it’ (p.
       8). To do so, Jurkevics has put together these victorious and oppressed schools of
       thought. Perhaps another implied baby-bathwater argument of the book is that one
       does not necessarily have to throw the baby (the traditional western canon) out with
       the bathwater (Euro-centric theorizing). One shudders to think what some of these
       figures, from Nazi jurist Carl Schmitt to the virulently racist Immanuel Kant, might
       have thought about being put into conversation with indigenous scholars or black
       anti-colonial thinkers. Jurkevics picks up these classical scholars not to agree with
       or refute them in their entirety, but because some aspects of their thought are useful
       to her argument.                                      
         For instance, Jurkevics notes that while she agrees with critiques of Arendt’s fail-
       ure to grapple with American settler-colonialism, she nevertheless believes one can
       ‘read her thought against the grain so that her most illuminating theoretical insights
       can be wielded against the injustices of settler colonialism and racist international
       hierarchies’ (p. 105). Thus, Jurkevics takes the reader through some of the tradi-
       tional debates and histories of political theory, but with a critical edge. In Chap-
       ter 4, for instance, Jurkevics discusses the classic myth of the Treaty of Westphalia
       in order to further problematize the notion of territory that has been read out of it
       and notes how the North American Haudenosaunee Confederation in fact influenced
       seventeenth-century German thinkers and models of rule (p. 98).
         The most promising component of Jurkevics’s argument is her claim that
       democracy should focus on being a participatory process, rather than wrestling
       with the proper ways to border people or territory. One obvious target of this is
       the nation: she is against national homelands and nationality-based citizenship
       in favor of, inter alia, ‘open borders, residency-based citizenship, land sharing
       and overlapping rule, jurisdictional contest, political inclusion of non-humans in
       determining land policy [and] the accommodation of mobility’ (p. 9). Her sketch

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contested territory: a theory of land and democracy beyond… 903
                                                             
       of a cosmopolitan geography is therefore also a more general intervention into
       democratic theory, which she urges to widen its conception of democratic prac-
       tices with a more territorially or geographically minded one she calls ‘world-
       building.’ As Jurkevics sees it, world-building is ‘a set of practices through which
       we build, rebuild, contest, and negotiate our shared physical worlds’ that ‘must be
       considered alongside other practices such as voting, deliberation, representation
       as a fundamental component of any robust theory of democracy’ (p. 20).
         I completely agree with Jurkevics’s claim that we are in need of a cosmopoli-
       tanism from below, one that is skeptical of universalism’s tendency toward world-
       states and sufficiently attentive to local or anarchical forms of politics. And her
       call for political theory to re-conceptualize humans’ political relationships to
       the natural world and non-humans, especially by centering indigenous and non-
       western thought, is a much-needed intervention for political theorists of territory.
       Still, by centering the primacy of territorially-based relationships over others, I
       wondered if she too quickly forecloses the possibility of anarchical communities
       organized on non-spatial terms that would otherwise fit very naturally into her
       concept of world-building.                            
         Take, for instance, my area of study—corporations. Jurkevics argues that to be
       consistent with democratic self-rule, legitimate legal pluralism must be restricted
       to ‘public, territorial authorities that have the potential to be democratically legiti-
       mated by constituencies demarcated by residence’ (p. 223). This would exclude
       transnational and multinational corporations. Jurkevics rightly points out that all
       corporations—from oil companies to cloud computing companies—have territorial
       nexuses and therefore all have points at which they can be subjected to these territo-
       rial authorities’ rules and regulations. Still, this conceptualization seems to reject the
       possibility that corporations themselves can be sites of contestation and democrati-
       zation—and, therefore, are also political communities—such as workplace democ-
       racy initiatives or other traditions of political pluralism that Jurkevics’s vision for
       localized world-building nicely complements. Or what about corporations that do
       not fit neatly into either a territorial or non-territorial categorization, such as the
       university, which may or may not have physical campuses and thus shared occu-
       pancy of land? Or online communities who may never meet in person, yet who nev-
       ertheless engage in a kind of virtual world-building? The anarchical communities
       of Wikipedia certainly contest and debate the content and structures of the site in a
       manner that mimics the messiness of any local municipal council, but over shared
       servers rather than shared land.                      
         Of course, the idea of contested territory is that it is meant to be contested—and
       Jurkevics’s conceptualization is broad and malleable enough that I think these politi-
       cal communities could still be encompassed by her framework. Jurkevics argues that
       ‘shared inhabitation of a territory is the most fundamental basis of political con-
       stituency, more fundamental than national or cultural belonging, association, or even
       shared institutions. Territoriality does not overcome these other forms of sociality;
       instead, it underlies and encompasses them’ (p. 223). This book can certainly be a
       useful roadmap and exploration for what non-sovereign territories can look like, and
       a forceful argument for how ‘the messiness of overlapping rule should be featured as
       a component of democracy rather than a problem’ (p. 15).

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       904                                        A. Utrata  
                                                             
         The indomitable geographer Doreen Massey once wrote that ‘specifically spa-
       tial identities (places, nations) can equally be re-conceptualized in relational terms’
       (2005, p. 21). The wager of Jurkevics’s book is perhaps the inverse of this idea, that
       all (or all democratic) relationships can be re-configured in territorial terms. Still,
       as one of those scholars skeptical of territory that Jurkevics is trying to convince, I
       remain unsure about territory. I found myself thinking about the fires in Los Angeles
       in the winter of 2025, and how many of the people who hope to stay and rebuild
       their homes had had their fire insurance canceled in the months before the blaze. It
       seems to me that even occupancy is infrastructural, and therefore relational, before
       it is territorial. Regardless, I greatly admire the cosmopolitan geography Jurkevics is
       building; she has made a strong case for why territory is the right brick to leave in
       place.                                                
                                                             
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Massey, D. (2005) For space. Sage Publications.       
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             