[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:885–888       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00755-y            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Friedrich Pollock: The éminence grise of the Frankfurt
       School                                                
                                                             
       Philipp Lenhard: Brill Academic, 2024, Leiden. Boston. x+279pp.,
       ISBN:978-90-04-50748-7, 292 pages                     
                                                             
       Douglas Kellner1                                      
                                                             
       Published online: 29 March 2025                       
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Friedrich Pollock (1894–1970) was a German-American social scientist and econo-
       mist who was one of the founders of the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt
       am Main. Although Pollock was a key member of the Frankfurt School, Philipp Len-
       hardt is the first scholar to focus his study on the close relationship and continuing
       friendship and collaboration between its longtime director, Max Horkheimer, and
       his close friend. Whereas previous histories of the Frankfurt School presented Pol-
       lock as the manager of the Institute for Social Research, immersed in administrative
       work, Lenhardt focuses on how his research and close relationship with Horkheimer
       helped shape the Marxist orientation of the Institute. The chapters proceed chrono-
       logically, from the Institute’s founding until Pollock’s death.
         In his chapter on “Scientific Marxism,” Lenhardt expands his focus somewhat
       from Pollock and Horkheimer, and discusses the Institute’s First Marxist Study
       Week organized by Karl Korsch and Felix Weil, with the wealthy Weil becoming the
       Institute’s key financer, and with Pollock and Adolph Grünberg becoming impor-
       tant administrators of the Institute in the pre-Horkheimer period. Lenhardt presents
       biographical sketches of the many other colorful figures in the Institute for Social
       Research, the seminars of the 1920s, with Pollock inaugurating a seminar on “The
       Problem of Workers and Salaried Employees’ Leisure Time” (p. 55), and the role
       of women such as Hilde Weiss and Hedde Massing, as well as the activities of the
       better known members, with a focus on Pollock and other members’ close working
       relationship with the Marx-Engels Institute in Moscow.
         Chapter 5 on “The Quest” details Pollock’s and other members’ of the Insti-
       tute’s break with the Marxism of the Soviet Union and their well-known devel-
       opment of critical theory, with Pollock’s important role continuing to be a focus
                                                             
       *                                                     
         Douglas Kellner                                     
         kellner@ucla.edu                                    
       1 UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA                    
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       886                                        D. Kellner 
                                                             
       of Lenhard’s analysis, along with the rise of Horkheimer, Adorno, Lowenthal,
       Fromm, Marcuse, Neumann, and the other well-known members of the Institute.
         Prior to the Nazi seizure of power, Pollock had used his contacts in the Inter-
       national Labour Organization to establish a Geneva branch of the Institute. In
       1933, Pollock and Horkheimer moved into exile, first in Geneva, then to Lon-
       don, Paris, and finally New York City. In the chapter “Dusk” Lenhard engages the
       Institute’s study of National Socialism and the growing debates over its nature.
       In the debates, Pollock developed his important concept of “state capitalism” in
       which he argued for the primacy of the political over the economic in national
       socialism, where the state owned and controlled the economy.
         As the 1930s progressed, Pollock expanded his concept of state capitalism to
       include the Soviet Union and the social democracy of the Roosevelt administra-
       tion in the U.S. and other European governments. Pollock’s analysis of the Soviet
       Union and Nazi Germany led him to the conclusion that a planned economy was
       necessary in the western capitalist societies suffering a crisis of capitalism. In
       addition, Pollock believed that a study of the planned war economies in World
       War I could also provide insights into ways to develop a planned economy and
       problems to avoid (p. 93).                            
         Despite the fact that the world had never before had so many raw materials,
       machines, skilled workers and advanced methods of production, Pollock argued
       that the capitalist system had failed to adequately exploit its resources and pro-
       duce a rational economy to serve the interests of the people. Instead the state
       in an age of monopolies served the interests of big business and provided force
       to keep the workers under control (p. 94). Furthermore, the authoritarian state
       would provide a continuation of this process, thus developing a form of state cap-
       italism in the service of monopolies.                 
         At this point, the National Socialists had gained power in Germany and began
       arresting members of the Frankfurt school, along with labor and political leaders,
       and opponents of the Nazi regime. Lenhart discusses the arrest of key members
       of the Frankfurt School who remained in Germany and how Pollock, Horkheimer,
       and others escaped to the United States where they would remain during World
       War II. In his capacity as administrative head of the Institute, Pollock helped
       many members of the Institute and other opponents of fascism to escape Europe
       and gain entry to the United States (pp. 106ff).      
         With an increased number of German refugees settling in New York, Pollock
       and Horkheimer organized research projects into National Socialism to support
       the refugees and with limited resources helped them settle into a new country.
       Lenhart describes in detail the research projects and critique of fascism devel-
       oped by members of the Institute and other refugees (pp. 110ff), and also how
       Pollock helped members of his own family escape Nazi German and find relief
       and support in the United States (pp. 116ff).         
         Subsequent chapters develop analyses of the works developed by the Frank-
       furt School, including Pollock’s continuation of his study of “state capitalism”
       (p. 146) and the Institute’s collective work The Authoritarian Personality that
       Pollock contributed to, including the debate with Franz Neuman over whether
       National Socialism is best described as exhibiting a “primacy of the political,” as

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Friedrich Pollock: The éminence grise of the Frankfurt School 887
                                                             
       Pollock argued, or a “primacy of the economic” as Neuman argued in Behemoth
       (pp. 148ff).                                          
         In the 1940s, the Institute and Pollock focused on studies of antisemitism which
       had been manifest in Germany and Europe and in the prologue to the rise of Nazism
       and World War II and that the Institute also saw in the United States. Eventually, the
       Institute received funding from the American Jewish Committee in 1943 to pursue
       their research projects into antisemitism (pp. 156ff). Lenhart argues that Pollock’s
       contribution to the project was best summarized in an April 1944 article on “Politi-
       cal Anti-Semitism” which he presented at the annual conference of the Women’s
       International League for Peace and Freedom, in which he argued, in Lenhart’s sum-
       mary, that “Political Anti-Semitism” “was a novel norm of hostility toward Jews dis-
       tinct not only from medieval anti-Judaism, but also from the racial antisemitism of
       the nineteenth century. While “the motives of religious, economic, or general cul-
       tural order may be sufficient to explain certain Anti=semitic attitudes in the past,”
       he wrote, “they do not give us a satisfactory explanation for the readiness of large
       groups to accept totally inconsistent Antisemitic propaganda at its face value” (p.
       157).                                                 
         Pollock was also director of the major study of The Authoritarian Character pro-
       duced by the Institute. This gave him knowledge of fundraising and allowed him to
       more clearly see that antisemitism was also found in his new home in the United
       States. Summarizing Pollock’s work on the authoritarian personality project, Len-
       hart writes: “With the grant of $13,000 [equivalent to more than $250,000 in today’s
       money], the JLC funded the project so generously that Pollock, as the institute’s
       financial director, was able to employ 30 researchers and engage 270 volunteers,
       offering many of them a desperately needed lifeline” (p. 159).
         Later chapters document Pollock’s respected standing in the United States with
       an account of his “Dinner at the White House” with the Roosevelts (pp. 161ff), his
       joy the night in 1945 marking Germany’s total capitulation to the allied forces (pp.
       178ff), his closing of the Institute offices in New York (pp. 180ff), his move to Cali-
       fornia (pp. 194ff), and his return to Germany (pp. 182ff).
         Pollock was in charge of researching a possible university or research institute
       position in Germany (pp. 195ff), and the re-establishing of the Institute in Frankfurt
       in a return in November 1951. Resuming the Institute in Frankfurt, Pollock lectured
       on “Modern Economy and Society: structural Transformations” in July 1951, and
       “Theory and Practice of the Planned Economy” in the winter semester of 1951/2. In
       the summer of 1952, he was appointed to a personal chair and lectured on planned
       economy (p 202). Pollock edited the major project of the Institute after their return,
       6000 pages of a report Gruppenexperiment (Group Experiment) on German politi-
       cal attitudes toward democracy and fascism that was controversial and widely dis-
       cussed. Many Germans resented the Jewish scholars reminding them of the horrors
       and continued presence of antisemitism but Pollock and his colleagues were well-
       respected in academic and intellectual circles (p. 205).
         Pollock himself was disturbed by the findings of continued antisemitism and the
       reception of the report, and did not renew his German citizenship. Yet he under-
       took one last research project and published a book on automation in 1946 (pp.
       210ff). Pollock and Horkheimer considered retirement, and in 1959, they moved

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       888                                        D. Kellner 
                                                             
       to Switzerland, although Pollock held a position as professor emeritus at the Uni-
       versity of Frankfurt until 1963. The two friends continued their close relation in
       Switzerland for the remaining years. Pollock died of stomach cancer in Montagnola
       in 1970, while Horkheimer passed away in Nuremburg in 1973. They lived long
       enough to see their work receive new popularity and publication in the 1960s and
       1970s, and thanks to Lenhart’s excellent biography of Pollock the “grey eminence”
       of the Frankfurt now has available to a broad public a legacy to pass on his life and
       work to a new generation.                             
                                                             
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             