[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:822–825       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00750-3            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Rethinking political thinkers                         
                                                             
       Manjeet Ramgotra and Simon Choat (eds), Oxford: Oxford University
       Press, 2024, xxxvii + 744 pages, ISBN: 9780198847397  
                                                             
       Takamichi Sakurai1                                    
                                                             
       Published online: 21 February 2025                    
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Although political theory (PT) is attracting a wide, international audience, it has
       revealed an ignorance of the heterogeneous political theories that exist around
       the globe. The discipline is generally considered Western, despite recent attempts
       to globalize it as international political theory (IPT), comparative political theory
       (CPT), or global intellectual history (GIH). The first of these is a fusion of interna-
       tional relations (IR) and PT. The second is a new discipline that strives to reflect on
       the blind spots of the Western orientation of PT. And the third is a field that seeks
       to integrate non-Western political thought historically. IPT is a more empirical-ori-
       ented field, and its internationality is not the result of reflection on its own disci-
       pline. CPT is clearly a new disciplinary challenge that tries to incorporate globally
       existing political theories. GIH is similar, but its focus is on history.
         Rethinking Political Thinkers does not fit into any of these categories. However,
       it captures the essence of the venture of broadening the horizons of PT in the sense
       that it seeks to reveal PT’s disciplinary character in favor ‘exclusively of white Euro-
       pean men,’ whereby PT has excluded ‘voices of women and People of Colour’ and
       ‘women of colour’ (p. 1). In short, the volume challenges traditional PT, thereby
       going beyond a male-centered, Western practice of PT while absorbing some of the
       globally existing political theories PT has overlooked or disregarded.
         Political theorists should welcome a volume that shines a light on ‘voices that
       have not usually been heard’ (p. 1). Despite this statement, however, this book is
       not a full-fledged attempt to broaden PT’s disciplinary horizon. In fact, the vol-
       ume itself admits, ‘[t]his is not a book of comparative political thought’ and ‘[m]
       any, though by no means all, of its thinkers are European and American’ (p. 4).
       The editors justify its composition by claiming that the fact that ‘Europe and the
       United States have dominated global affairs for the past half-millennium’, means
       that ‘the ideas produced by European and American thinkers have played a signif-
       icant role in justifying and maintaining that dominance’ (p. 4). This is completely
       *                                                     
         Takamichi Sakurai                                   
         tsakurai@sfc.keio.ac.jp                             
       1 Keio University Shonan Fujisawa Campus, Fujisawa, Kanagawa 252-0882, Japan
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Rethinking political thinkers                823      
                                                             
       acceptable, and there is nothing wrong with it, but I would like to mention two
       things concerning this issue as follows:              
       (1) Despite touching on the discipline’s name, the volume overlooks the essence of
          CPT as a disciplinary challenge that not only involves a comparison of Western
          and non-Western political thought, but rather a more active examination of non-
          Western political ideas that have been underexplored in the context of PT per se
          and the introduction of those values to the Western field;
       (2) The volume almost completely disregards East Asia and covers China simply in
          the form of an appendix of the section ‘revolution.’
                                                             
         From this perspective, the volume appears an unremarkable, revised textbook
       of Western political thought that focuses exclusively on Western modernity and
       disregards any content that strays from it. In fact, the table of contents reveals the
       volume’s main focus: balancing the gender equality of the theorists discussed and
       the contributors discussing them. Non-Western thought does not appear to inter-
       est the editors as they stress in the introduction that the dominance of Western
       thought in global affairs justifies a focus on the Occident (p. 4).
         The editors seek to show the relevance of traditional political thought with-
       out depending on any approaches such as Skinnerian contextualism, Marxism,
       and other existing methods of PT. They herein claim that the ‘history of ideas is
       punctuated by moments of change, repetition, crisis, and rupture, within thinkers
       both reviving older ideas and concepts and introducing innovations’ (p. 8). From
       this perspective, they try to display the raison d’être of PT decolonizing its cur-
       riculum: ‘Of all academic disciplines, political thought is as good a place to start
       decolonizing as any because … its canon is dominated by white men’ (p. 10).
       Does the decolonization of PT simply signify the inclusion of those who have
       been excluded in its curriculum? Why is that so? Why does PT need and aim to
       decolonize itself? Is PT colonized in the first place? Then what about equivalents
       in the non-Western world? Do they wish PT to be decolonized? Probably the edi-
       tors are only vaguely aware that not only does ‘decolonizing’ affect the discipline
       of PT, but it also reveals its own language parochialism. To be clear, we political
       theorists—in the sense of the Anglophone field of PT—do not know anything
       about any other frameworks of PT in the world wherever non-Western languages
       are mainly spoken.                                    
         The reason why preventing the exclusion of ‘women, Indigenous people, and
       People of Colour from the canon of political thought’ (p. 9) matters is not primar-
       ily because ‘this reflects their exclusion more generally—from the institutions in
       which political thought has been written and from participation in formal poli-
       tics’ (p. 9), but rather because we lose opportunities for exposure to unfamiliar
       and heterogeneous thoughts. The power balance of the content does not so much
       matter to textbooks of PT—this is primarily because they are in any case pro-
       duced by privileged university teachers as producers of those textbooks work-
       ing at a university, the world of power imbalance—but missing chances of dialog
       does matter to them. Speaking more bluntly, the constitution of lopsided gender
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       824                                        T. Sakurai 
                                                             
       balance in a textbook of PT is simply a consequence of lower priorities of politi-
       cal thought and its related fields for females—this is indeed clearly shown by the
       lower proportion of female PT students in advanced countries nowadays, but I
       do not believe that this is the result of society’s political intentions but rather of
       women’s practical decisions. Yet the editors’ methodological concern is solely
       race, gender equality, and minority rights.           
         Despite the problems involved in their methodological position on the venture
       of revising the PT curriculum, it sounds reasonable that the editors approve of a
       long term of white male dominance over PT in the sense that it ‘can be a slow-
       moving discipline, and inertia means that political theorists and philosophers, who
       themselves are often white men, teach the next generation what they themselves
       were taught, thus perpetuating a static canon’, and that ‘[w]omen have only rela-
       tively recently gained access to higher education, and barriers to academic study and
       advancement persist, in particular for women of colour’ (p. 9).
         The editors coherently clarify that PT has long been occupied by white male the-
       orists on the ground that the canon of the discipline has repeatedly been produced by
       them while inherited by male pupils. However, they are only dimly aware that what
       they mean by ‘political theory’ is solely an Anglophone discipline, and that their
       discussions as well as those in the field are completely limited by the English lan-
       guage. To be clear, their discourse totally excludes equivalents operating in different
       languages far from the West. For this reason, the editors confine issues to particu-
       lar areas where only English and some of the other Western languages are spoken,
       thereby failing to recognize the heterogeneity of PT itself. In a nutshell, the edi-
       tors’ language parochialism hinders them from noticing not only that the existence
       of divergent and heterogeneous ideas methodologically affects their disciplinary dis-
       cussions, but also that the English concept of PT can be deconstructed by the aim of
       ‘decolonizing PT’ per se.                             
         It goes without saying that it is not sufficient at all solely to include non-Western
       political ideas randomly for the purpose of enhancing the quality of PT—in this way
       it might be possible to simply produce a globally attractive textbook of PT, though.
       Inclusion does not guarantee the production of one that meets global demands and
       requirements. If a political theorist is uninterested in political ideas outside the
       realm of the West, he or she is of course allowed to remain aloof from them—it
       makes more sense to ignore the non-Western world altogether, rather than to blindly
       update curricula according to the demands of global political thought. Even if some-
       one totally excludes non-Western ideas, it would be still quite possible for him or
       her to write a perfect course book on PT that satisfies the demands of traditional PT.
       However, if one’s aim is to produce a textbook of PT with true value that is accept-
       able to a wider audience in this global age, the method seen above is a sole require-
       ment only to satisfy one’s pompous self.              
         Even in our twenty-first-century society, unfortunately, it seems that the English-
       speaking field of PT is still worshiping the white male political theorists and phi-
       losophers and the method to ‘teach the next generation what they themselves were
       taught’ and thereby ‘perpetuat[e] a static canon.’ This insinuates that simply draw-
       ing attention to unfamiliar political thoughts does not at all satisfy the requisites for
       textbooks of PT in our times. For we can easily imagine that most English-speaking

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Rethinking political thinkers                825      
                                                             
       political theorists would look sideways at the non-Western world and seek to escape
       their obligations to take time for things they have no interest in, while continuing to
       worship the ‘canon.’ To avoid this, ultimately all political theorists are required to
       for once become ‘comparative political theorists.’ Yet this is absolutely impossible
       for those whose lives are totally dependent on the English language only.
                                                             
                                                             
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under
       a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
       manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and
       applicable law.                                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             