[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:24            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00802-2            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Revolution and restoration: the politics of anachronism
                                                             
       Massimiliano Tomba, Fordham University Press, New York, x+160pp.,
       ISBN: 9781531512491                                   
                                                             
       Saygun Gökarıksel1                                    
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       Amid the morbid symptoms of a collapsing liberal international order and the
       worldwide resurgence of authoritarianism and fascism, Massimiliano Tomba’s book
       inspires hope by animating the reader’s imagination about allegedly outdated, anach-
       ronistic practices and exploring their potential to rethink politics beyond the logic of
       modern capitalist nation-state. Tomba’s work sharply departs from the usual accounts
       of democratic backsliding or regression that calls for the defense of existing lib-
       eral legal institutions and representative democracy. Similarly, it also seeks to avoid
       reproducing the terms of a reactionary conservative politics of history that idealizes
       a golden age to be restored. This provocative book offers ways to break the current
       impasse, which impoverishes political and historical imagination, locking it up in an
       eternal neoliberal present with no alternatives.      
         Tomba’s book could be read alongside Walter Benjamin, Ernst Bloch, Daniel
       Bensaïd, Harry Harootunian, Gary Wilder, and Talal Asad, who in different ways
       critically interrogated the framework of the secular, capitalist, modern nation-state
       and its sanctification of unilinear progressive temporality. In many ways, Revolu-
       tion and Restoration draws on Tomba’s previous book, Insurgent Universality: An
       Alternative Legacy of Modernity (2019), in suggesting the need to confront colonial
       power both within and outside Europe. When decolonial critique limits itself only to
       non-European world and ignores its internal links to intra-European colonial war, it
       would remain halfway through, as Tomba usefully observes. Moreover, that would
       erase the history of the insurgents of western modernity including the German peas-
       ants of 1525 and the Communards of 1871, who paid a heavy price for defending
       alternative traditions of self-government and for ‘standing in the way of “Western
       civilization”’ (p. 13). Instead, Tomba calls into question the self-description of domi-
       nant western modernity, which paints a monolithic image for itself and constructs a
                                                             
         Saygun Gökarıksel                                   
         saygun.gokariksel@bogazici.edu.tr                   
       1 Boğaziçi University, Istanbul 34342, Turkey         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        24 Page 2 of 4                          S. Gökarıksel
                                                             
       linear, unidirectional narrative of historical progress that places the nation-state at
       its endpoint and judges the ‘pre-modern’ era retrospectively, as a bygone, outmoded
       age of ‘darkness’ and ‘barbarity’. Against this ‘reverse teleology,’ Tomba invites the
       reader to attend to the ‘incompleteness of the past’ and see anachronisms as fields of
       possibilities for concrete action and experimentation.
         It is important to note that Revolution and Restoration is not a scholastic exer-
       cise at the plane of ideas. Nor is it a selective assortment of various curious ideas
       from the anachronistic past to do political theory. It is a concise, but densely layered
       work of ‘theory in practice’ that takes social practice and struggle seriously, as the
       historical material ground for developing and experimenting with new concepts and
       institutions. As Tomba notes, concepts emerge in a battlefield made in and through
       struggles. In this sense, Tomba’s open-ended, pluralistic understanding of the past
       also applies to his appreciation of learning from the contingencies of practice, echo-
       ing the famous insights of Rosa Luxemburg and Antonio Gramsci.
         Revolution and Restoration examines three pillars of modernity: property, democ-
       racy, and citizenship. Through an analysis of contemporary and historical examples,
       each chapter centers on one of these pillars. Altogether, the chapters offer a trenchant
       critique of private property regime, representative democracy, and national citizen-
       ship that are central to modern capitalist nation-state.
         Tomba fleshes out the notion of social property by drawing on the work of Marx,
       Cochabamba’s indigenous cosmologies of nature and their struggle against water
       privatization led by the Bolivian state, and the medieval dominium utile, which fore-
       grounds user rights instead of ownership and posits an extended, intergenerational
       temporal and moral relationship between things and persons in the language of duties
       and obligations. While violently attacked by capitalist nation-states, the concept of
       social property, Tomba suggests, might help us think beyond the binary of private and
       public or state property and the extension of liberal legal concepts to natural entities
       to address ecological problems.                       
         In a similar vein, Tomba zooms in on different medieval institutions, particularly,
       the imperative mandate (mandatum imperativum) and sanctuary, to highlight an alter-
       native to representative democracy and legality based in the framework of modern
       nation-state. Referring to the tradition of the governed to recall the elected deputies
       and dispersing sovereignty over plural local authorities and communities, the impera-
       tive mandate has been one of the liberal democratic legal order’s most feared institu-
       tions of ‘democratic excess’ as it challenges the sanctity of absolute indivisibility and
       unity of sovereignty represented by the state. While stigmatized as anachronism and
       abolished by state authorities, this democratic tradition, Tomba eloquently discusses,
       has emerged many times in modernity, reactivated in different ways by social strug-
       gles, as in the practice of the Communards of 1871 in France, in the councils’ repub-
       lic in the German revolution, and in the Zapatistas’ practice of mandar obedeciendo.
         Likewise, the sanctuary tradition, which could be traced to the Middle Ages and
       even earlier, has harbored an alternative conception of citizenship. In Tomba’s work,
       sanctuary does not simply figure as a space of nonstate legality where ‘an abstract
       right of immigrants is defended but as practices articulated around nonstate obli-
       gations and traditions’ (p. 97). Offering a space of refuge for people regardless of
       citizenship and forming reciprocal relationships, sanctuaries fell into clash with the

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Revolution and restoration: the politics of anachronism Page 3 of 4 24
                                                             
       modern state that aspires to concentrate power, diminish local authorities, and expand
       its jurisdiction to ever new areas. Yet, the sanctuary tradition has been taken up by
       social struggles, as is currently in the US to defend migrant communities against state
       agents’ racist attacks. In the midst of morbid features of authoritarianism, sanctuary
       appears as a promising instance of ‘performed citizenship’ (p. 116).
         It is important to underscore that Revolution and Restoration should not be taken
       as offering a totalizing statement about the entirety of the Middle Ages. It is not a
       romantic idealization of nonmodern pasts. Tomba’s inquiry is rather genealogical,
       zooming in on certain medieval practices and forms, the traces of which it discerns
       in the life of concepts, institutions, and struggles. The book unsettles the modernist
       construction of medieval traditions as ‘relics of barbarianism of the darkest ages’ (p.
       113) and enriches our understanding of politics and history. Certainly, the politics
       of anachronism does not only apply to medieval or non-European traditions. One
       can observe a similar orientation, for instance, in the dominant liberal and conserva-
       tive treatments of eastern European state socialist experience after 1989–1991 as a
       bygone, dead past of criminality and terror, a phenomenon that I examined in my
       recent work.                                          
         At the same time, with respect to the politics of restoration, one might wonder how
       might we distinguish critical left democratic politics of restoration from the ‘con-
       servative revolution’ that seeks to restore anachronistic pasts, as scholars of fascism
       discussed, including Alberto Toscano (2023). Tomba is well aware of this question
       and provides a brilliant account by drawing on the Spartacist insurgency in 1919. He
       highlights that what separates them is the notion of order. Where Luxemburg and
       Landauer invoked the tradition of the oppressed and supported the destruction of the
       oppressive ancient, feudal, and political theological order, theorists of the conserva-
       tive revolution referred to the ‘aristocracy of rulers’ and strove to restore that order.
       Where Luxemburg and Landauer sought to transcend the statist order, conservatives
       sought transcendence in the state and aimed to reestablish hierarchies within its order
       (p. 36).                                              
         This is an insightful distinction, yet one might want to learn more about the histor-
       ical context of power, in which those anachronistic customs, traditions, and legalities
       discussed in the book operated. The ‘extractive’ approach employed by Tomba (p.
       121) does not always offer an adequate understanding about the relations of exclu-
       sion, hierarchy, and domination in which those customs and traditions functioned. As
       many scholars have shown, local customs, authorities, and traditions are not neces-
       sarily devoid of forms of oppression and exploitation. The same argument could be
       made for the natural law tradition, which was, for instance, as Antony Anghie (2004)
       showed, invoked to justify the Spanish colonial conquest of the Indies in the 16th
       century for the purposes of civilizing the Indians. One could, of course, not expect
       these points to be elaborated in this small book, but these contexts of power are also
       important to detail further.                          
         The engagement with anachronistic traditions, Tomba rightly suggests, must not
       be left to conservative forces who use them to naturalize the social hierarchies and
       exclusions including patriarchy. Anachronisms do not offer recipes or ready-made
       solutions to the current problems. It is in the course of action and reactivation of those
       past forms that new concepts and institutions might emerge. By weaving together dif-

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        24 Page 4 of 4                          S. Gökarıksel
                                                             
       ferent times and traditions, ‘freeing futures imprisoned in the past’, (p. 8) and offering
       a multitemporal and pluralistic framework, Revolution and Restoration opens up new
       avenues to explore. This is a precious effort in times of morbid symptoms.
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Anghie, A. (2004). Imperialism, Sovereignty and the Making of International Law. Cambridge University
         Press.                                              
       Tomba, M. (2019). Insurgent Universality: An Alternative Legacy of Modernity. Oxford University Press.
       Toscano, A. (2023). Late Fascism: Race, Capitalism and the Politics of Crisis. Verso.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             