[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:33            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00812-0            
       RESEARCH                                              
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary     
       authoritarian politics and the struggle between       
       sovereignty and relationality                         
                                                             
                                                             
       Leticia Sabsay1                                       
                                                             
       Received: 27 January 2025 / Accepted: 2 March 2026    
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       In a historical present marked by the ascendance of neo-authoritarianisms across
       the world, we bear witness to a renewed politics of hatred and violence and the
       heightening of the vulnerability of life. In this context, vulnerability has either been
       weaponised to justify violent forms of government or critically mobilised to stake
       a claim for justice, thereby becoming the object of political dispute. Against this
       backdrop, I explore this neo-authoritarian moment as one that enacts a political
       aesthetics of cruelty. This political aesthetics, I argue, points to the political capture
       of a death drive, that is, an inclination to destruction which has made itself available
       to social mobilisation through the normalisation of murderous hatred and political
       violence pivoting around the idealisation of sovereignty. In this vein, I examine
       vulnerability as a concept that foregrounds the relational character of our existence
       while illuminating the psychic register of relationality that challenges the drive to
       sovereign mastery and the sovereign self. Ultimately, I ask whether, and under what
       terms, those instances that invoke the relational dimension of bodily vulnerability
       can indeed challenge this political aesthetics of cruelty, and what kind of hope they
       may open.                                             
       Keywords Authoritarianism · Cruelty · Death drive · Political aesthetics ·
       Vulnerability                                         
                                                             
                                                             
       We are living in a historical present marked by the COVID pandemic, the steep accel-
       eration of planetary climate emergency, and the intensification of ongoing and more
       recent wars whose power of destruction is, in some senses, unprecedented. These
       phenomena have made life’s sacrificial character and the uneven exposure to death
                                                             
                                                             
         Leticia Sabsay                                      
         l.sabsay@lse.ac.uk                                  
       1 London School of Economics and Political Science, London WC2A 2AE, UK
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 2 of 19                           L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       and annihilation candidly apparent. This disparate devaluation of all living beings,
       together with the increasing precarisation of people’s living conditions, is paralleled
       by the ascendance of neo-authoritarianisms that either deny these planetary dangers
       or manically imagine them under control, thereby prompting a renewed politics of
       hatred and a rampant disregard for, if not investment in, the heightened vulnerabil-
       ity and exposure of life to violence. From the governments of Donald Trump in the
       USA, Nayib Bukele in El Salvador, and Javier Milei in Argentina, to those of Viktor
       Orbán in Hungary, Giorgia Meloni in Italy, Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey, and Narendra
       Modi in India, to name a few, we are not quite unanimously sure about how to name
       such different geo-political presents –whether neo-authoritarianism, neo-fascism,
       techno-fascism, or authoritarian post-neoliberalism, as recent literature makes clear
       (Traverso, 2018; Gambetti, 2021; Toscano, 2023; Semán, 2024; Catanzaro, 2026).
       The diversity of contexts in which we live, contexts that expose the pervasiveness of
       coloniality as a condition of our present and the heightening of global inequalities,
       makes it difficult, if not impossible, to reach a common diagnosis. However, despite
       this differentiated complexity, we may agree or share the feeling that we live in a
       global historical moment obsessed with hostility and destruction.
         In this article, I suggest that, notwithstanding significant differences across con-
       texts, this common political pull towards hostility and destruction, as well as the
       normalisation of hatred as a political tool, point to what I conceptualise as a political
       aesthetics of cruelty. To do so, I build on earlier work in which I tentatively framed
       cruelty (Sabsay 2020a) as the backdrop to the feminist resurgence of the past decade.
       Considering the alarming scale of devastation facilitated by the now-consolidated
       decline of democratic ideals and the discrediting of institutional politics, here I fur-
       ther elaborate on cruelty, connecting pleasure and suffering as a fulcrum of contem-
       porary political aesthetics. Against this backdrop, I then critically interrogate whether
       vulnerability could offer a potential site of investment to counter it. The reflections I
       offer on sovereignty, cruelty, vulnerability, and political aesthetics engage with criti-
       cal scholarship in the tradition of Jacques Derrida, Sigmund Freud, Theodor Adorno,
       and Judith Butler, in pursuit of a lens through which to illuminate some of the psy-
       chosocial aspects that may be operating at the core of authoritarian and destructive
       tendencies in contemporary politics. Rather than advancing an all-encompassing
       diagnosis, mine is a speculative effort aimed at contributing to ongoing debates about
       the current drive to render life in all its manifestations –nonhuman, human (and, by
       extension, all its hierarchies and sites of dehumanisation), and social– ever more
       vulnerable (Braidotti, 2015; Butler, 2022; Wilson Gilmore, 2022; Daigle, 2023;
       Edmeads, 2024).                                       
         My argument develops as follows. I take as a point of departure the hypothesis
       that contemporary violent cultural and political trends are linked to a profound sense
       that sovereignty is endangered –both at social and subjective levels. Drawing on
       Derrida’s work on sovereignty and cruelty (Derrida, 2002, 2009, 2014, 2017), I first
       argue that the sense that the sovereign power to determine the course of our indi-
       vidual, collective and social lives is under threat if not already lost unleashes reactive
       responses that idealise the authoritarian exercise of sovereign mastery as well as the
       cruelty associated with it. Secondly, I contend that this process entails mobilising a
       psychically powerful inclination towards violence and destruction directed at either

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 3 of 19 33
                                                             
       others or oneself. I explain this inclination as a particular psychosocial manifesta-
       tion of the death drive (Freud, 1962, 2011). While the death drive and the aggressive
       impulses connected to it are essential to the development of the self, they can also
       facilitate violent and destructive aims. As Derrida (2002) reminds us, in Freud, it is
       also the death drive that is operative in the enactment and manifestation of cruelty. It
       is my argument, then, that in our current conditions, where the world as we knew it
       seems to be arriving at its end, this psychic impulse –the death drive– has made itself
       distinctly available to be politically mobilised in particularly violent and destructive
       ways. I develop this two-fold argument in the next two sections.
         Following this, I thirdly posit that the deadly management of this sense of lost
       sovereignty is enacted by and manifested in what I characterise as a political aesthet-
       ics of cruelty. In other words, the political mobilisation of the death drive towards
       destruction and violence, as it happens in our authoritarian times, leads to a vision of
       society and politics that is fundamentally cruel. Cruelty, I argue in the third section,
       is intimately linked to a renewed idealisation of sovereign mastery. As such, it could
       be considered pivotal to contemporary political aesthetics, that is, as characterising
       the aesthetic dimension of the political (Rancière, 2013). To the extent that this politi-
       cal aesthetics of cruelty consecrates full autonomy and unlimited self-sufficiency,
       building on Butler (2009, 2020), I examine the notion of vulnerability as a modality
       of relationality that could challenge the identification with neoliberal authoritarian
       versions of the sovereign self.                       
         In the last section, I ask whether relationality, as figured through vulnerability,
       could be considered a potential site of hope. Wrestling with Adorno’s (2005, 2020)
       sombre yet prophetic vision of the politics of his time and the allure of utopian invo-
       cations to relationality, I explore the feasibility of grounding resistance to the politi-
       cal aesthetics of cruelty discussed earlier in the relational and vulnerable character of
       our bodily existence. I do so, based on my contention that it is precisely vulnerability
       that is exposed in this sense of lost or endangered sovereign power. Put in psycho-
       social terms: when our lack of absolute sovereign mastery cannot be successfully
       disavowed, vulnerability becomes apparent. This is arguably so to the extent that the
       psychic impulse towards mastery, necessary for the formation of the self, emerges
       in part as a path to process our unpleasant relational dependency on others and the
       world (Freud, 1961, 2011, pp. 56–60; Brown, 1985, pp. 105–112).
         Vulnerability thus haunts any sovereign effort to disavow it. From this standpoint,
       and building on Butler’s (2009, 2020) argument that our relation to vulnerability
       is constitutively ambivalent, I explore how this disavowal of vulnerability might
       be addressed differently. Thereby, in contrast to sovereign and solipsistic modes of
       agency that recoil from a relational approach to bodily vulnerability, I underscore
       the Freudian link between eros and relationality and finally consider whether –and
       on what terms– those instances that illuminate the relational and erotic dimension of
       bodily vulnerability might open an alternative path to the prevailing political aesthet-
       ics of cruelty. At this juncture in my inquiry lies the question of what kind of hope this
       path might open, one that would demand the seemingly impossible task of radically
       detaching from the desire for sovereign mastery.      
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 4 of 19                           L. Sabsay  
       Cruel sovereignty                                     
                                                             
       In the lectures gathered in The Beast and the Sovereign (2009), Derrida reminds us
       of sovereignty’s intrinsic link with political domination, violence, and cruelty as part
       of his project to deconstruct the classic western notion of sovereignty as absolute,
       indivisible, and unconditional. As Derrida explains (2009, pp. 75–76), sovereignty
       is defined as the force to establish the law and, therefore, is beyond the law. As a
       result, it wields legitimate power over life and death, that is, the use of violence,
       and as such, according to the philosophical tradition of Thomas Hobbes and Carl
       Schmitt, sovereignty inaugurates the political. Here, Derrida continues, the political
       emerges as a modality of domination and mastery that affirms the superiority of the
       sovereign, as well as the determination of an enemy of said sovereign (be it a nation-
       state or a sovereign people) with whom only an antagonistic relationship would be
       possible (Derrida, 2009, pp. 26–30, 77–78). Regardless of whether one subscribes
       to this proposition, Derrida reiterates that within the western philosophical tradition,
       hostility and violence (as much as fear) are at the core of the principle of sovereignty
       that structures politics.                             
         Derrida is giving these lectures in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of 11 Sep-
       tember 2001, analysing the reconfiguration of struggles for sovereignty against inter-
       national law that followed. In this vein, he makes clear that it would be naïf to believe
       that invocations to the universality of human rights and international penal law do not
       participate in the dispute for sovereignty, for these invocations are sustained in the
       presumed sovereignty of humanity or the human person (Derrida, 2009, pp. 70–71).
       The problem with these invocations is not only that the human is a fraught category,
       as we have long learned from foundational postcolonial, decolonial, and Black femi-
       nist critical theory (Fanon, 1986; Said, 1995; Hartman, 1997; Spivak, 1999; Quijano,
       2000; Lugones, 2007; Wynter, in McKittrick, ed., 2015). More than that, and to the
       extent that, because of its relation to law, sovereignty signifies the legitimate exercise
       of violence, the appellation to the sovereign universality of the human cannot entirely
       sever its ties to destruction, if not even cruelty, either.
         The ineffability of violence and cruelty attached to sovereignty is also made clear
       in Derrida’s seminars on The Death Penalty, published in two volumes (2014, 2017).
       From the outset, Derrida points out that even if the death penalty were abolished, it
       would survive, assuming other forms (Derrida, 2014, p. 11, Rottemberg, 2012, pp.
       146–149). He arrives at this pessimistic conclusion insofar as capital punishment, for
       him, is not only the emblematic figure of cruel punishment but also fundamentally,
       the ultimate sign of sovereignty. Arguably, then, one might interpret Derrida’s pessi-
       mistic conclusion as ultimately suggesting that it is sovereignty (that is, the sovereign
       right to kill –or let die (Derrida, 2017, p. 198)– or exert violence against others) that
       will survive the abolition of the death penalty. Furthermore, in these seminars where
       Derrida directly links sovereignty with cruelty, he suggests that while we may arrive
       at more humane forms of punishment, this does not mean that cruelty will disappear
       but rather mutate (Derrida, 2017, pp. 6–10). As Elizabeth Rottemberg states when
       considering Derrida’s analysis of the guillotine and the passage ‘from bloody cruelty
       to a cruelty without blood’, this will ‘not signal the end of cruelty’, neither a progres-
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 5 of 19 33
                                                             
       sive path against cruelty or towards less cruel means, ‘but rather a shift in both the
       form and the visibility of cruelty’ (Rottemberg, 2012, p. 154).
         In sum, according to these Derridean insights, cruelty is intrinsically associated
       with sovereignty and, subsequently, with the modern western configuration of poli-
       tics sustained by sovereignty. Sovereignty is intrinsically cruel since it is established
       by the principle of the right to violence and to determine the forms of legitimate vio-
       lence –a cruel principle indeed. In moments of crisis, when sovereignty is in dispute,
       cruelty makes itself apparent at the heart of politics.
         We could arguably think of our historical present as one in which renewed dis-
       putes over sovereignty and its reconfigurations –especially the forms it takes, the
       conditions under which it is exercised, and by whom and against whom– are centrally
       at stake. In just over a decade, manifold nationalist impulses have been exponentially
       articulated through rhetoric that pivots around the recovery of control –heralding
       sovereign power– over national territories and the destinies of (exclusionary versions
       of) their peoples. Donald Trump’s 2025 presidency programme and the consolidation
       of the MAGA (Make America Great Again) movement, whose name derived from
       the chief slogan of his 2016 presidential campaign, and Boris Johnson’s promise to
       ‘Make Britain Great Again’, reinscribing Margaret Thatcher’s plea from her 1950
       ‘General Election Address’, as part of his commitment to implement Brexit clearly
       illustrate the point.                                 
         Also, regionally, the idea that the sovereign control of borders is under threat
       has been pivotal to the success of new far-right forces in the 2024 European Parlia-
       ment elections, as well as to the justification of the European Union’s (and Euro-
       pean national states’) unspeakable anti-immigration policies, which both enact and
       externalise the racially inflected, deadly treatment of dehumanised people. Indeed,
       critiques of humanitarianism seem anachronistic in the current scenario, where invo-
       cations to Europe activate a powerful drive towards violence and spectacular cruelty
       across the political spectrum. The anti-migrant impulse is, after all, very much in
       line with the investment in national sovereignty expressed by far-right resolute Euro-
       sceptics, European Patriots and Conservatives alike,1 as much as with the British
       Labour Party. Proof of this became evident as soon as PM Sir Keir Starmer assumed
       office, when, during his first week in power, he travelled to Italy to learn from Giorgia
       Meloni’s immigration policy, which he publicly praised.2
         Not only contemporary wars and genocidal violence but also the re-emergence
       of nationalisms across the political spectrum, often articulated through hatred and
       enacted violently (both against external and internal populations), make clear that
       the activation of cruel and destructive impulses against others accompanies the sense
       of endangered sovereignty. Nationalisms and their others, however, are not the only
       catalysers of cruelty. Given the role of the global south in capital accumulation and
       colonial extractive enterprises in Argentina, for instance, sovereignty is not straight-
       1 Europe Sovereign Nations Group (ESN), Patriots for Europe Group and The European Conservatives
       and Reformists Party (ECR) reflect the European right-wing spectrum concerning national sovereignty.
       2 See The Guardian, 16 September 2024: h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / u k - n e w s / 2 0 2 4 / s e p / 1 6 / g i o r g i a - m e l
       o n i - s t a r m e r - s h o w e d - g r e a t - i n t e r e s t - i n - o u r - a l b a n i a - m i g r a t i o n - d e a l (Accessed 12 December 2024).
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 6 of 19                           L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       forwardly attached to the nation but rather articulated by the libertarian government
       of Javier Milei in terms of market-driven, individualist freedom against the state.
         Milei, an outsider to politics who gained popularity on social media and as an
       eccentric commentator on television panels, took power in December 2023, capitalis-
       ing on his anti-political rhetoric. His party, La Libertad Avanza (Freedom Advances),
       formed in 2021, won on a platform promising to reduce the state to its minimal
       expression, including closing the central bank and dollarising the economy, not only
       to combat a political class presented as intrinsically corrupt, but also to dismantle
       what he frames as oppressive welfare policies and ‘totalitarian’ progressive prin-
       ciples of inclusion and equality, in defence of the market as the ultimate sovereign.
       A self-described libertarian, Milei is a whimsically idiosyncratic economist aligned
       with anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard. A declared admirer of Trump and Elon
       Musk, he has aligned Argentina with Trumpist US interests and saddled the country
       with unsustainable debt, enabling international capitalist agendas to dictate its eco-
       nomic policies, subjecting it to ever-increasing poverty. This has entailed the shrink-
       ing and closure of numerous public institutions, reducing or eliminating welfare
       protections, laying off public employees, and stagnating salaries, all in the name of
       a sovereign and cruel, market-driven freedom that catalyses a powerful inclination
       towards destruction.                                  
         The thanatic tone that taints contemporary politics can attach to different signi-
       fiers and is also present in the enactment of suicidal political decisions (such as the
       Argentine vote for Milei, who promised to destroy the state and all things public, or
       the vote for Brexit in the UK). The question of climate emergency and the reluctance,
       if not cynicism, with which it has been addressed by political leaders in myriad inter-
       national, regional, national, and local arenas is a good example of this suicidal logic.
       The disregard for our planetary survival shows not only a necropolitical dismissal
       of the (so-called) global south, although this dismissal is undoubtedly at the heart of
       climate change denialism. It also decisively reveals a rampant all-powerful drive to
       destructiveness paired with the fantasy of an omnipotent human species that has self-
       attributed the sovereign right to destroy the planet and itself.
         These are just some vignettes of broad political trends. One can surely think of
       many instances where dealing with death and the decimation of entire populations,
       peoples, (always already hierarchised) human, dehumanised, and all forms of nonhu-
       man life, compromising the whole planet, seems to be leading to more destruction
       winning the game. Of course, this is not new –the lives of entire generations destined
       to live in refugee camps, subjected to wars, past and present genocidal violence per-
       petrated by settler-colonial powers, or the perpetual destitution suffered by the sub-
       altern in the postcolony are testament to how sovereignty and cruelty have remained
       attached to the political after the formal end of slavery and decolonisation in western
       late modernity. Looking inward, the two world wars have typically been the object of
       extensive intellectual reflection precisely along these lines. What appears to be new
       is the expansion and accelerated normalisation of sovereign destructive cruelty in our
       apocalyptic ‘permacrisis’ times, which, as Geerts and Carstens (2024) note, paves
       the way for intensified resentment and mimetic forms of violence at both macro and
       micro levels. Beyond the planetary scale of destruction that has accompanied capital-
       ism’s development, the 2008 global financial crisis, and even more so, the COVID-19

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 7 of 19 33
                                                             
       pandemic, also revealed, in a startling manner, how easily life can become sacrifical
       for populations who believed themselves exempt from ‘the disposable’. This ten-
       dency aligns with a technologised and renewed post-truth politics of hatred, encour-
       aged by political leaders and widely amplified through media and digital networks.
       The growing popularity of new and extreme-right politicians, preceded by now
       consolidated authoritarian and securitarian governmental rationales at the heart of a
       thwarted version of neoliberal democracy, and the intensified circulation of hatred at
       micro levels—assisted by tech tycoons such as Musk and Mark Zuckerberg—further
       inflect this process anew.                            
         Confronted with this scenario, one of the most pressing questions in the last
       decade has revolved around the traction that authoritarian neoliberal, nationalistic,
       far-right-wing populist, neo-fascist, libertarian and white supremacist movements
       have been having among an increasing number of people. This tendency also marked
       the shift of the whole political field towards right-wing, conservative, if not reaction-
       ary, and authoritarian dynamics at local, national, transnational, and international
       levels. Clearly, each context demands specific analyses, and it would be just wrong to
       subsume one authoritarian emergence under the other. However, it would be equally
       wrong to conceive of each of them in isolation, or as a series of parallel but struc-
       turally unrelated phenomena, for they are all tied to the nature of colonial global
       (and thus racial) capitalist accumulation, which in turn, has led to a permacrisis of
       planetary proportions (Wilson Gilmore, 2022; Geerts & Carstens, 2024; Catanzaro,
       2026). Furthermore, quite pragmatically, the political actors that lead them develop
       common tactics and form strategic alliances across their differences. As the annual
       international summits of CPAC (Conservative Political Action Conference), taking
       place in disparate parts of the Globe since 2017, and the European VIVA Conference
       organised since 2021 by Spanish Party Vox, backed up by ECR since 2022 and with
       ample presence of right-wing leaders from across the Americas, make clear, they
       work transnationally in articulated ways.             
         In the face of the increasing influence of these emergent actors, already recog-
       nised as ‘the reactionary international’ years ago (Tokatlian, 2018), my interest is in
       the political articulation of collective destructive feelings that traverse them all.3 I
       contend that these destructive impulses are called upon by the partially orchestrated
       sense that sovereign powers are under threat. The call of these reactionary actors
       resonates with those who perceive their hegemonic positions or privileges as being
       threatened or questioned –and their futures as denied– as is the case of the racist
       glorification of misogyny propagated by the new alternative right that has thrived in
       online media, with Andrew Tate as one of its most visible exemplars.
         More broadly, they enact a powerful call among those whose lives are out of their
       control, imperilled by an insurmountable neoliberal imperative that either intensifies
       all sorts of incertitude, threatens their life standards, their chances for survival or
       heightens their already precarious lives. The economy of debt (Ahn, 2013; Brown,
       3 While being common currency within the left, ironically, this label was massively popularised by
       Emmanual Macron at the start of 2025. See Le Monde, 11 January, 2025: h t t p s : / / w w w . l e m o n d e . f r / e n / i n t e r
       n a t i o n a l / a r t i c l e / 2 0 2 5 / 0 1 / 1 1 / m a c r o n - t r i e s - t o - c h a r m - m u s k - w h i l e - a c c u s i n g - h i m - o f - b e i n g - r e a c t i o n a r y _ 6 7 3 6
       9 5 0 _ 4 . h t m l (Accessed 18 January 2025).       

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 8 of 19                           L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       2015; Cavallero & Gago, 2021), where people are deprived of proper access to food,
       shelter, healthcare, and education or are deemed to be in debt forever, emerges as an
       unstoppable economic force that certainly makes them more vulnerable (albeit dif-
       ferentially) (Butler, 2009), and challenges any sense of sovereign mastery over their
       own lives. Hence, the violent displacement of resentment or frustration towards oth-
       ers (Sabsay 2020b) or the desire to become all-powerful individuals with sovereign
       and unlimited powers exempted from any ethical regard for others than themselves.
       Such is the direction in which authoritarian neoliberal and new right-wing discourses
       like Milei’s have resignified and affectively capitalised on the political signifier ‘free-
       dom’. Milei’s libertarian party, called La Libertad Avanza, and chief slogan, Viva
       la Libertad, carajo! with which he usually closes all public interventions, are not
       circumscribed to uphold limitless market freedom. They invoke the allure of uninhib-
       ited capitalist freedom (Catanzaro, 2026) akin to absolute sovereign mastery, entic-
       ing subjects to act as they please without any regard for social costs, beyond any
       externally imposed law or ethical limit concerning how this freedom may destroy or
       negatively impact others’ or even one’s own fate.     
         To understand the psychosocial dynamics of this critical political juncture, I pro-
       pose the hypothesis that the political articulation of collective destructive feelings,
       invoking fantasies of sovereignty, belongs to the social channelling of the death drive
       towards destructiveness and aggression, and to the unleashing of cruelty, understood
       as the pleasure of causing or participating in suffering which can derive from (sadistic
       or masochistic) aggressive impulses (Freud, 1961). The relationship between cruelty,
       the death drive and sovereignty is also thematised by Derrida in ‘Psychoanalysis
       Searches the States of Its Soul: The Impossible Beyond Sovereign Cruelty’ (2002).
       In this essay, Derrida reflects on the entanglement between cruelty and the psychic
       register of the will to (sovereign) power. Sovereignty and cruelty’s connection to
       the death drive emerges when Derrida traces Freud’s use of the term ‘cruelty’ while
       moving away from the theological-political notion of sovereignty (discussed above)
       to focus on the will to sovereign mastery, which he redescribes as a drive (Derrida,
       2002, p. 273, Martínez Ruiz, 2021, p. 104). Building on this reading, in the follow-
       ing section, I bring together the destructive manifestation of the death drive and the
       impulse to reaffirm a sovereign mastery that is imagined as lost or imperilled from a
       psychosocial perspective.                             
       The political life of the death drive                 
       Freud advances his theory of the death drive throughout the looming first decade of
       the interwar period to understand the limitless human capacity for massive destruc-
       tion as seen in the war and the innumerable atrocities of history. He first developed
       this notion in 1920 in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, and in 1929, reintroduced it in
       Civilisation and Its Discontents to consider the development of societies. There, he
       asserts that ‘cruel aggression’, defined as an instinctual inclination, has been at the
       heart of human history, as it is testified by ever-present violence and war (Freud,
       1962, pp. 58–59). Freud’s idea here is that human and social life revolves around the
       tension between two basic drives: eros and thanatos, the first concerned with affirm-
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 9 of 19 33
                                                             
       ing life, and the second invested in ending it. Humans are ambivalent, and their lives,
       as much as societies, can be understood as a battle between attachments to hate and
       love: aggression and destruction on the one hand and, on the other hand, affection,
       care, and reparation. For Freud, in societal terms, the death drive or thanatos relates to
       the impulse to break social bonds, to tear societies apart. It mobilises aggressiveness
       and hostility between persons, groups, and peoples. Meanwhile, eros is the impulse
       to form social bonds with others to create communities and relationships; it keeps us
       together.                                             
         What is crucial in Freud’s death drive theory is that not only can we not get rid
       of these basic human impulses –they are both constitutive and necessary for our
       development–but also both drives never work in isolation from each other. Revis-
       ing his theory of masochism in light of his later consideration of the pleasure prin-
       ciple, Freud (1961, p. 164) affirms that ‘very extensive fusion and amalgamation, in
       varying proportions, of the two classes of instincts takes place’. The death drive is
       insurmountable, and libido’s (eros) work consists partly in taming and/or diverting
       it outwards, maintaining it bound to life. Seen in this light, the best we can hope for,
       then, is that eros is able to contain the death drive, channelling the aggression associ-
       ated with it (Klein, 1975) towards non- or at least less destructive aims. In Derrida’s
       terms, eros signals the indirect way in which Freud finds any hope. Eros, the drive
       that affirms life, is ultimately the vessel for the deferral of death (Derrida, 2002, pp.
       271–272).                                             
         In Civilization and its Discontents, Freud highlights the painful process through
       which social selves are formed, as infants confront a limit that challenges their sense
       of wholeness and unity with the world, thrusting them into the human condition
       of incompleteness and dependence. This first experience of wholeness and primal
       fusion with the world (invoked as an ‘oceanic feeling’ (Freud, 1962, p. 11) and psy-
       choanalytically understood in the first instance as a fusion between the infant and
       the primary carer) is what the human will long for and try to regain throughout their
       life. The route to wholeness, though, could involve the acceptance of the difference
       between self and other, leading to the search for this wholeness through symbolic
       means and relations with others (pointing towards love bonds later signified as eros).
       Or, on the contrary, the denial of the split between self and other and the search for
       wholeness by undoing the difference between the two, which ultimately entails the
       desire to destroy the other (pointing towards aggression and the death drive, later
       signified as thanatos).                               
         According to Melanie Klein (1986)–who mobilised Freud’s theory of the death
       drive to develop her theory of subject formation–the key is that for the formation
       of the self, the first task is to establish boundaries that distinguish and detach the
       self from the object/world. This separation–a traumatic one–speaks to the thanatic
       impulse to break bonds as well. In parallel, this separation is associated with a primal
       experience of helplessness and an absolute dependence on others for our survival.
       Thus this separation also triggers aggression towards the ones on whom we depend,
       insofar as they are reminders of our traumatic –and ultimately failed– attempt at
       achieving almighty self-sufficiency. Hence, the murderous feelings that come with
       the conflicted sense of our vulnerability or dependency (Sabsay 2020b). The aggres-
       sion perceived as coming from the other, who may or may not satisfy our needs as

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 10 of 19                          L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       dependent beings, is, in fact, a reflection of our aggression against them. In other
       words, accompanying the fact that we develop attachments to objects and others to
       survive, there is the impulse to protect ourselves by securing boundaries against those
       attachments.                                          
         By transposing the individual process of socialisation onto broader human and
       social dynamics, Freud (1962) highlights how they demand the renunciation of
       instinctual satisfaction, encompassing both pleasure-seeking and destructive ener-
       gies. Both levels entail the renunciation of primal hostility as well as sexual drives,
       which is effectuated through the cultural deviation of drive energies into love bonds
       with others (whose sexual aim is cut off) (Freud, 1962, p. 59). Sexual life needs to
       be restricted for humans to be able to live in society, and this demands a process of
       repression by which sexual drives are re-channelled towards asexual loving bonds.
       This process of repression, facilitated by social norms (internalised in the super-ego),
       will also divert the hostile impulses of the death drive. But this diversion entails that
       destructiveness will become embedded in the process of socialisation, that is, in the
       repressive character of society itself.4 The inclination towards aggression and vio-
       lence cannot, thus, be eradicated from societal life. To the extent that aggression and
       destructiveness are put to work in the service of repression, they are also triggered by
       it. As Rosaura Martínez Ruiz’ (2021, pp. 53–57, 70–72) masterfully detailed explana-
       tion makes clear, the discontent that civilisation produces evokes the ambivalent rela-
       tion that humans have to the law that civilisation imposes on them. Aggressiveness
       manifests both in the repressive work of law and in the human unconscious resistance
       and hostility towards it.                             
         By engaging the concept of the death drive in order to examine our violent and
       cruel historical present, I do not aim to naturalise violence. I concur with Hannah
       Arendt’s warning against seeking in the death drive a rationale for the normalisation
       of violence and extermination that shapes international politics. I also emphatically
       oppose the highly problematic view that a ‘secret death wish of the human species’
       or ‘an irrepressible instinct of aggression’ can explain the violent history of humanity
       (Arendt, 1970, p. 5). Rather, my endeavour is to illuminate the role of the psychic
       register in facilitating (or not) particular political dynamics, as there is no political
       gesture that can have a productive life if it is not by interpellating us psychically.
       Based on this understanding of the relationship between psychic life and politics,
       I maintain that the contemporary conjuncture politically channels the death drive,
       realising it in cruel aggression, destruction, and hatred. Along these lines, my point is
       that the death drive is easily activated under destructive forms by the painful experi-
       ence of dependency, and that, consequently, in a context where heightened ‘socially
       induced vulnerability’ (Butler, 2016, p. 25) is framed as, or deflected through, the
       threat of endangered sovereignty, this politically orchestrated sense of jeopardised
       sovereignty becomes politically cathected (that is, libidinally attached) to the refusal
       of our relational formation as subjects and our constitutive lack of self-sufficiency.
         Such refusal manifests in forms of denial, where the aggressive manifestations
       of the death drive become attached to the denial of one’s own dependence, vulner-
       4 Primal hostility towards others is what law and ethics try to contain. However, Freud’s pessimistic con-
       clusion is that this cultural effort against aggressiveness ultimately tends to fail (Freud, 1962, pp. 59–62).

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 11 of 19 33
                                                             
       ability, fallibility, or finitude –a phenomenon that the global exposure to COVID-
       19 has fuelled in unfathomable ways. The fact that an imperceptible virus–a form
       of minimal life that lingers between the organic and the inorganic–has thrown the
       world upside down is a testament to how little or sovereign power humanity has
       over its survival. The planetary scale of this deadly pandemic has done nothing other
       than expose, in the most extreme ways, how vulnerable our lives are. The collective
       traumatic consequences of this global experience remain obscure. Still, during the
       pandemic and throughout its aftermath, we have witnessed forms of suicidal and
       murderous denial, arguably aimed at erasing the deepening sense of survival at risk.
       Add to this the experience of an increasing number and scale of climate emergencies.
       In the face of overwhelming uncertainty, the refusal of vulnerability today seems
       prone to being politically captured as an idealised imperative to overcome the lack of
       sovereign power over life.                            
         Through this political capture, vulnerability is negatively signified as the loss of
       sovereign autonomy. At the social or governmental levels, it might translate into a
       mandate to regain an imagined, threatening loss of sovereign power over borders
       and populations, and over the fate of social orders as we know them. This logic
       expresses, as Butler (2016, p. 26) remarks in their undoing of the binary opposi-
       tion between vulnerability and agency/resistance, a ‘resistance to vulnerability that
       belongs to certain projects of thought and certain formations of politics organized
       by sovereign mastery’. In the current context, the impulse to disavow vulnerability
       is captured in politically authoritarian modes through the mobilisation of a stubborn
       investment in enhancing or recovering (what is, in fact, a fantasy of) an almighty,
       self-sufficient sovereign power that we never had in the first place. Only seemingly
       paradoxical, alongside this disavowal lies an overt, even uncompromising, effort to
       produce increasingly extreme vulnerability in others. What appears distinctive about
       the contemporary moment is that, in such defensive modes, the investment in unre-
       strained and ruthless state or solipsistic individual sovereignty seems to override any
       other principle and is put to work at all costs, no matter the consequences, even if –or
       perhaps most so if– it entails the destruction of others or even ourselves.
       Vulnerability and the political aesthetics of cruelty 
       While war and genocidal violence stand as emblematic instances where the death
       drive’s destructive orientation seems to have dominated eros, our neo-authoritarian
       political landscape can also be interpreted as one where the death drive has most
       successfully recruited eros to satisfy its aggressive impulses, as the logic of denial
       described in the previous section illustrates. This logic of denial might explain in part
       the rise and increasing popularity of neo-authoritarian and neo-fascist politics, which
       appeal to this form of almighty power that negates the other and despises difference,
       questioning basic democratic principles.              
         However, in parallel with this, a subsequent way in which this denial may work
       is by attaching the death drive to otherwise democratic and life-affirming ideals. The
       mobilisation of freedom articulated as unlimited sovereign individual autonomy by
       new right-wing parties mentioned earlier might be a case in point. What is at stake in
       this idea that the death drive attaches itself to democratic life-affirming ideals such
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 12 of 19                          L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       as freedom is that it operates in ways that encourage the disavowal of the need to
       live together, including both the pleasures and the burdens of being connected with
       others. At the level of social meaning-making, when the death drive attaches to these
       ideals, it paves the way for their successful resignification in ways that call for more
       death and destruction rather than life, empathy, reparation, and care. Hence, the easi-
       ness with which the far-right has capitalised on these signifiers. After all, this cruel
       fantasy of sovereign individual autonomy, now turned into cruel self-sufficiency, has
       a long history, easily recognisable in the move from liberal to neoliberal imperatives.
       It is a truism that neoliberalism is profoundly anti-social.
         Another significant way in which the death drive recruits eros is by finding plea-
       sure in suffering and making suffer, or in the indifference toward unnecessary or
       avoidable suffering: the realm of cruelty. Cruelty has been central to western moder-
       nity all along. As Derrida (2002) reminds us, cruelty is inherent in the drive for sover-
       eign mastery that has structured western history. Contemporarily, however, this cruel
       pleasure in aggression, which extends to annihilating the other, points to a distinctive
       political aesthetics where the death drive has been socially activated and attached to
       politics in particular ways. Concerned with the mutations that cruelty seems to have
       undergone in this historical present, I contend that cruelty works within a political
       aesthetics that not only promotes manifold manifestations of violence and destruction
       but also triggers a (sometimes glorified, sometimes more or less disavowed) desire
       for and fulfilment of pleasure in hate.               
         I consider cruelty as a structuring vector of current political aesthetics based on
       the understanding that the realm of the political has an aesthetic dimension. Drawing
       on Muñoz (2009) and Rancière (2013), my point of departure is that each politi-
       cal regime implies a distribution of what is thinkable about the form of society and
       collective life (Muñoz, 2009; Plot, 2009; Rancière, 2013). As Martin Plot (2009)
       explains, this aesthetic dimension involves what is made visible and invisible within
       society, which affects what is socially accepted as articulable and doable, how we
       perceive society and what remains excluded from this perception. Along these lines,
       my point is that this is a political aesthetics where cruelty –attached as it is to a pro-
       found anti-relational or anti-social ethos proper to the death drive– is undergoing a
       baffling process of expansion and normalisation. To think of cruelty as a driving vec-
       tor of contemporary political aesthetics points to a shift in which cruelty ceases to be
       covert – there is no political need for cruel measures to be bitterly justified, disguised,
       or regretted – and becomes sadistically and masochistically assented to as standard.
       As Nora Merlin (2025) observes in her analysis of Argentine President Milei’s dis-
       course within the context of the global rise of the new right, what distinguishes the
       contemporary enjoyment of cruelty is its uninhibited display and approval, facilitated
       by its disassociation from guilt or shame (Merlin, 2025: 67–80).
         In my view, this process points to a reconfiguration of the ‘distribution of the
       sensible’ that, according to Rancière (2013), characterises the aesthetic dimension of
       the political. In this political aesthetics, cruelty assumes a renewed visibility and is
       normalised as a structuring horizon for imagining society.
         This political aesthetics of cruelty is manifest in the articulation of fantasies of
       state and self-sovereignty with contemporary forms of fascination with violence
       against others. This fascination –if not pleasure in participating in or witnessing

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 13 of 19 33
                                                             
       scenes of violence and hatred– is perfectly exemplified by the crudeness of war and
       state-sponsored violence as well as neo-fascist and far-right leaders raving, but also
       by media’s obsessive over-exposition of scenes of political violence as well as the
       ceaseless circulation of hatred within social networks. Nihilist or repudiated indif-
       ference rather than a fascination with violence, on the other hand, are not exempt
       from participating in the political aesthetics of cruelty either. This exposition triggers
       for the vast majority, at its best, forms of narcissistic empathy with the suffering of
       others (Chouliaraki, 2012), outrage or moral condemnation. All of them are modes
       of witnessing that ultimately confirm the disavowal of either our fascination with or
       indifference towards violence, making us relatively complicit with cruelty as a politi-
       cal aesthetics.                                       
         Perhaps to challenge what Adorno identified as the coldness characteristic of west-
       ern capitalist modernity (see Edmeads, 2024), which is intimately linked to cruelty,
       vulnerability has increasingly been invoked as a ground for countering the escalation
       of precarity, violence and destruction in a globally mediated world. In critical dia-
       logue with its renewed currency (Chouliaraki, 2024), feminists have engaged with
       the concept of vulnerability, elaborating on a range of relational ontologies from
       different philosophical perspectives to underscore its potential (Drichel, 2013; Mack-
       enzie et al., 2013; Gilson, 2014; Pulkkinen & Cano Abadía, 2020; Daigle, 2023). In
       turn, vulnerability has also been weaponised to justify the most violent impulses.
       Vulnerability can (and does) also work in tandem with the activation of a death drive,
       and, like other life-affirming ideals (i.e. freedom), it has been put to serve a political
       aesthetics of cruelty as well. The idea that ‘identity politics’ and liberal progressive
       and inclusive programmes have made whiteness vulnerable is at the core of white
       supremacist groups’ discourse, as it is to nationalistic anti-migrant discourses. Simi-
       larly, the idea that the nation and ‘family values’ are vulnerable to their disappearance
       by the politics of sexual and gender diversity is also at the heart of anti ‘gender ideol-
       ogy’ campaigns, which, in this way, collude with white supremacist and nationalist
       movements as well.                                    
         Given these mobilisations of vulnerability, my argument that the denial of vulner-
       ability in oneself is at the core of the pairing of cruelty and sovereignty might seem
       contradictory. As the examples above suggest, recognising vulnerability, rather than
       its disavowal, appears to underpin these discourses and mobilisations driven by rac-
       ism and misogyny, as Butler also reminds us (2016, p. 23), but also hatred. The logic
       in these cases is that the mobilisation of vulnerability works in at least two duplici-
       tous ways. Either vulnerability is denied entirely, hence the leap into the rampant
       acting out of sovereignty (as in the case of denialists of COVID, climate change,
       or gender- and sexuality-based violence).5 Or is evoked as something that not only
       needs to be overcome –something we could and should get rid of– but also as a posi-
       tion that is only acknowledged if it is ready to be displaced and projected onto some-
       one else; likely, ‘the other’. In the latter case, the logic goes like this: I have been
       allegedly thrown into an unjust position of vulnerability, and this is unjust because
       5 Arguably, this is linked to contemporary manifestations of misogyny and to political positions that chal-
       lenge the recognition of gender-based violence, such as those taken by the Spanish party Vox. This is a line
       of argument I cannot pursue here.                     

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 14 of 19                          L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       vulnerability is at odds, if not constitutively opposed, to my identity. Vulnerability
       does not belong to me because it has never defined who I am: it threatens my identity
       or impedes me from being who I am supposed to be, destined to be, or want to be.
       This ambivalent acknowledgement of vulnerability is paired with disavowal: I have
       been made or feel vulnerable, but I shouldn’t be or feel this way because –constitu-
       tively or by definition– vulnerable, I am not. Hence, the displacement and projection
       of vulnerability onto someone else, who, by definition, should be put into a vulner-
       able position, for it is their vulnerable position that sustains my identity or sense of
       being as what the other is not.                       
         One may object that this is just a disingenuous instrumentalisation of vulnerabil-
       ity, that the mobilisation of vulnerability within progressive and humanist discourses
       reflects, on the contrary, an empathic orientation towards others. Further complicat-
       ing the matter is that vulnerability does not have a stable, univocal meaning nor does
       it foreground a distinct political orientation. Instead, it is the object of political dis-
       pute. Disparate feminist investments in vulnerability may illustrate the point: pivot-
       ing around notions of victimhood, for instance, certain forms of carceral logics have
       invested in the vulnerability of the victim to amplify punitive claims and calls for the
       enhancement of state-sponsored violence (Ni Una Menos, 2019; Rodriguez et al.,
       2020; Sabsay, 2022). Similarly, feminists who declare that the recognition of trans*
       dignity and human rights endanger women’s rights and safety rely on a ‘naturalistic’
       notion of sex and femaleness that is utterly invested with vulnerability (Tudor, 2023).
         Considering the myriad uses of vulnerability, the question arises: would a political
       aesthetics centred on vulnerability be able to challenge this cruelty and offer hope
       that other better ways of inhabiting this world and living together might be possible?
       Vulnerability, erotic relationality and hope          
       In a harsh battle against burgeoning pessimism, I, like many, am wrestling with the
       question of what kind of politics might prompt hope today. Arguably, the disparate
       invocations of vulnerability I described reflect our ambivalent relation to it. There-
       fore to the extent that we cannot just discard this ambivalence, if vulnerability is to
       offer any potential for hope, the quest would be to find modes of addressing the dis-
       comfort with vulnerability differently.               
         As suggested earlier, vulnerability has been invested with hope through its elabo-
       ration as the locus of interdependence, radical relationality, and ‘transjective’ (Daigle,
       2023) capacities to affect and be affected. Informed by Butler’s (2009, 2016, 2020)
       theorisation of vulnerability, I wish to underscore, however, that the emphasis on
       relationality as an ethical ground for hope would be inoperative if separated from its
       social materialisation or if formulated in a purely affirmative stance. On the contrary,
       it must linger with the negative, for ‘we are bound to others not only through net-
       works of libidinal connection, but also through modes of unwilled dependency and
       proximity that may well entail ambivalent psychic consequences, including binds of
       aggression and desire’ (Butler, 2009, p. 30).         
         Critically engaging with Klein, Butler (2020, pp. 87–101) highlights that the ethi-
       cal question arises precisely because of the ambivalent nature of our desires, which
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 15 of 19 33
                                                             
       encompass life-affirming and murderous wishes, while, importantly, challenging
       Klein’s vision of the management of destructiveness as exclusively aimed at self-
       preservation. As Butler states (2009, p. 44), ‘[i]f I seek to preserve your life, it is not
       only because I seek to preserve my own, but because who “I” am is nothing without
       your life, and life itself has to be rethought as this complex, passionate, antagonistic,
       and necessary set of relations to others’. It follows from this that the acknowledge-
       ment of our dependent and relational lives would also entail dealing with the ambiva-
       lence between eros and the death drive, maybe with the hope that eros will channel
       aggression in ways that affirm life over death.       
         Two features of this understanding of vulnerability gesture towards what I take as
       a more operative configuration of hope, as a (Blochian) disposition towards a not-
       yet-actualised horizon, a force that, while indeterminate, may fill us –even if only for
       a fleeting moment– with the sensation that another better world is possible (Muñoz,
       2009). These two features are, in the first place, that vulnerability can be connected to
       eros, understood as the realm of connection with others. Secondly, that vulnerability
       fractures sovereignty, rather than simply refusing it.
         Regarding the first feature, as I have argued elsewhere (Sabsay 2016a, b), vulner-
       ability points to the idea that subjects are ultimately permeable thresholds where
       multiple voices, forces, experiences, and connections meet. This register of vulner-
       ability as the capacity to affect and be affected, evokes Spinoza’s conatus, the striving
       of all things natural (humans among them) to persevere in their being. The striving
       for perseverance, which in Spinoza manifests in passions such as desire –a desire
       for, a desire to– immediately connects us with something other than our own being.
       Furthermore, Spinoza’s conatus is akin to eros, the force that affirms life by forging
       bonds with others (see Sours, 1961). Indeed, contra Spinoza’s vitalist vision, Freud
       (2011, p. 87) turns to Arthur Schopenhauer to develop the concept of the death drive,
       conceptualised as the inclination of all things natural (human beings among them) to
       return to that oceanic feeling of being one with the world I referred to earlier, which
       ultimately points to an inorganic state. This state of absolute peace is at the basis of
       the insurmountable inclination to eliminate the excitation that disturbs the organism –
       the nirvana principle (Freud, 2011, p. 92). It is at this point that the pleasure principle
       meets the death drive, as it seeks to assuage excitation through a discharge of energy
       (libido) that would return the organism to its previous equilibrium –a dormant state
       that ultimately evokes death (Freud, 2011, pp. 51–54, 77–81).
         But if only this principle organises life, why don’t we go directly to self-destruc-
       tion and instead are so invested in keeping on living? It is in part responding to this
       question that, together with the thanatic inclination of the pleasure principle, Freud
       postulates that eros aims to defer death and affirm life in its relational dimension.
       Therefore, if hope emerges at all, it will be necessarily attached to eros, as Rosaura
       Martínez Ruiz (2021) emphatically sustains. This hope would link to the erotic defer-
       ral of death through a striving to be affected and to affect others in ways that affirm
       life; that is, in ways that pre-empt the defusion of the death drive and keep it enlisted
       under the purview of eros, rather than the other way around.
         It follows that, if vulnerability is reconceived as an instance of erotic relationality,
       it would point to the disturbance of the fantasy of sovereignty at the core of the politi-
       cal aesthetics of cruelty. The erotic force of relationality haunts (and may therefore

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 16 of 19                          L. Sabsay  
                                                             
       unsettle) the desire to articulate forms of sovereign agency that, at both social and
       subjective levels, disregard or stubbornly disavow the fact that, in a Butlerian sense,
       we are always already given to others and the world, just as they are given to us. We
       may find this haunting in aesthetic moments that, in a Rancièran sense, confront us
       with forms of production of the sensible that articulate a critique of the present, as an
       illumination that reveals what is excluded by existing regimes while also offering an
       aesthetic anticipation of an alternative psycho-political economy.
         The striving for sovereign mastery against which this hope could emerge has his-
       torically translated into the paramount capacity for destruction of western instru-
       mental modern reason, structured around objectifying knowledge and the desire to
       dominate nature and others (Adorno, 2005). Therefore, a political aesthetics of erotic
       relationality may emphasise the ultimate impossibility of this desire’s absolute reali-
       sation. Illuminating other potential but thwarted futures opened in the past or today,
       such political aesthetics may point to another more just, less violent not-yet and, in
       this sense, affirm hope (Muñoz, 2009). In this light, moments of hope could emerge
       precisely in those fugitive aesthetic experiences that unveil non-instrumental, non-
       dominating and ultimately non-fully knowable subject-object relations.
         The hope that emerges in those moments is not only one that cannot fully know
       what its prospects are insofar as hope starts where knowledge ends, in the Blochian
       sense that it dwells in the realm of the not-yet as an expectation of a better reality
       that has not yet shown. In Derridean terms, it is a hope that emerges messianically, as
       justice-to-come, understood, as Chipato and Chandler (2024: 12, 14) suggest, as ‘a
       vantage point to critique … the disavowed grounds enabling and constraining mod-
       ern conceptions of the political’. In other words, this hope cannot posit any content
       that would reproduce a subject-object relationship at the heart of the desire for sov-
       ereign mastery and the cruelty historically associated with it. Based on Timo Jütten’s
       reading of Adorno (2019), I would pose this as a negative hope. A negative hope
       points to a radical alterity we cannot know or imagine. It is a hope that, while opening
       a portal to a different mode of being, actively refuses to engage with any positive idea
       of “what should be” (Adorno, 2005; Jütten, 2019). As Jütten (2019, p. 293) suggests,
       this hope would be linked to a ‘minimal ethics [that] is characterised by humility with
       regard to one’s moral and ethical convictions, including one’s ability to know what
       the right thing is’. As a force that feeds the courage to continue resisting the wrong
       life (Adorno, 2005; Butler, 2012), this negative hope must yield the sovereign claim
       to know. It is, ultimately, a vulnerable hope.        
       Conclusion                                            
       In this article, I have argued that our historical present could be characterised by a
       political aesthetics of cruelty and asked what the grounds for hope might be today.
       Drawing on Derrida and Freud, I proposed that the cruelty at the heart of emerging
       authoritarianisms can be traced to the principle of sovereignty that structures modern
       western political reason. I subsequently examined the destructiveness immanent to
       this principle as it manifests contemporarily, interpreting it as a specific political
       capture of the death drive. In doing so, I approached cruelty as a political aesthetics
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 17 of 19 33
                                                             
       in order to elucidate the ongoing normalisation and revaluation of violence, destruc-
       tion, and hatred. Against this backdrop, I interrogated the political mobilisation of
       vulnerability and, drawing on Butler, examined its potential and its impasses as a
       counterweight to the attachment to sovereignty. In doing so, I reconsidered vulner-
       ability in the light of erotic relationality and, subsequently, as a psychosocial instance
       that gestures toward hope for a less destructive world.
         Vis-à-vis our planetary dreadful present and foreseeable future, drawing on
       Adorno, I connected this orientation towards erotic relationality to a negative form of
       hope that would refuse the satisfaction of the drive to sovereign mastery expressed in
       the reproduction of instrumental subject-object relations, even if this is hardly think-
       able given our subject formation. Hence, my proposal that this can only be a radi-
       cally negative, vulnerable hope. Derrida (2002, p. 241) asks psychoanalysis whether
       ‘is there, for thought… another beyond… that would stand beyond these possibles
       that are still both the pleasure…and the death or sovereign mastery drives …’, to
       conclude: ‘[h]ere, beyond the most difficult, the im-possible itself’ (Derrida, 2002, p.
       278). And so does my plea: if a non-sovereign relation to an unconditional unknown
       can emerge in political aesthetic experiences that may challenge our historically fur-
       nished psychic economy, a genuinely other, less destructive world might, tenuously
       perhaps, be possible, too.                            
       Acknowledgements The author thanks the two anonymous reviewers and the editors for their insightful
       and constructive comments, which were most helpful in refining and strengthening the arguments devel-
       oped in this article.                                 
       Author contributions This is a single-authored article. LS did all the research, and wrote the whole content
       and revised the manuscript.                           
       Funding The author received no funding for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article.
       Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
                                                             
       Declarations                                          
       Competing interests The author declared that there are no competing interests as defined by Palgrave or
       other interests that might be perceived to influence the results and/or discussion reported in this article.The
       authors declare no competing interests.               
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
       is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n
       s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / .                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        33 Page 18 of 19                          L. Sabsay  
       References                                            
                                                             
       Adorno, T. (2005). ([1951]) Minima moralia: reflections on a damaged life. Translated by E. F. N. Jeph-
         cott. London: Verso.                                
       Adorno, T. (2020). Aspects of the new right-wing extremism. Translated by W. Hoban. Cambridge: Polity
         Press.                                              
       Ahn, I. (2013). Deconstructing the economy of debt: Karl Marx, Jürgen Habermas, and an Ethics of Debt.
         Trans-Humanities, 6(1), 5–32.                       
       Arendt, H. (1970). On violence. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,.
       Braidotti, R. (2015). Posthuman affirmative politics. In S. E. Wilmer, & A. Žukauskaitė (Eds.), Resisting
         Biopolitics: Philosophical, Political, and Performative Strategies (pp. 30–56). Routledge.
       Brown, N. O. (1985). [1959]) Life Against death: The psychoanalytical meaning of history. Wesleyan
         University.                                         
       Brown, W. (2015). Undoing the demos: Neoliberalism’s stealth revolution. zone books.
       Butler, J. (2009). Frames of war. Verso.              
       Butler, J. (2012). Can one lead a good life in a bad life? Radical Philosophy, 176, 9–18.
       Butler, J. (2016). Rethinking vulnerability and resistance. In J. Butler, Z. Gambetti, & L. Sabsay (Eds.),
         Vulnerability in resistance (pp. 12–27). Duke University Press.
       Butler, J. (2020). The force of non-violence: An ethico-political bind. Verso.
       Butler, J. (2022). What world is this? A pandemic phenomenology. Columbia University.
       Catanzaro, G. (2026). Spectrology of authoritarian neoliberalism: Toward a critique of neoliberal ideol-
         ogy in late capitalism. Polity.                     
       Cavallero, L., & Gago, V. (2021). A feminist reading of debt. Pluto.
       Chipato, F., & Chandler, D. (2024). Justice ‘to Come’? Decolonial deconstruction, from postmodern poli-
         cymaking to the black horizon. International Political Sociology, 18(4), olae041. h t t p s : / / d oi . o r g / 1 0
         . 1 0 9 3 / i p s / o l a e 0 4 1                   
       Chouliaraki, L. (2012). The ironic spectator: solidarity in the age of post-humanitarianism. Polity.
       Chouliaraki, L. (2024). Wronged: The weaponization of victimhood. Columbia University.
       Daigle, C. (2023). Posthumanist vulnerability: An affirmative ethics. Bloomsbury.
       Derrida, J. (2002). Psychoanalysis searches the states of its soul: the impossible beyond of a sovereign
         cruelty. Without Alibi (pp. 238–280). Stanford University Press.
       Derrida, J. (2009). The beast and the sovereign Vol. I. University of Chicago Press.
       Derrida, J. (2014). The death penalty Vol. I. University of Chicago Press.
       Derrida, J. (2017). The death penalty Vol. II. University of Chicago Press.
       Drichel, S. (Ed.). (2013). Special issue on Vulnerability. SubStance, 132.
       Edmeads, L. (2024). Towards an ethics of undoing: Reimagining precarity, instrumental reason, and
         moral philosophy with Adorno and Butler. PhD Thesis, University of Brighton: Author.
       Fanon, F. (1986). [1952]) Black skin, white masks. Pluto.
       Freud, S. (1962). [1929]) Civilisation and its discontents. Edited and translated by James Strachey. New
         York: W.W. Norton & Company.                        
       Freud, S. (2011). [1920]) Beyond the pleasure principle. Edited and translated by T. Dufresne. Ontario:
         Broadview Editions.                                 
       Freud, S. (1961 [1924]). The economic problem of masochism. In The standard edition of the complete
         psychological works of sigmund freud, vol. XIX, pp. 155–170. Edited and translated by J. Strachey.
         London: The Hogarth Press and the Institute of Psychoanalysis.
       Gambetti, Z. (2021). The new fascist moment. Historical Materialism Blog, 21 June. h t t p s : / / w w w . h i s t o r i c
         a l m a t e r i a l i s m . o r g / b l o g / n e w - f a s c i s t - m o m e n t (Accessed: 6 December 2024).
       Geerts, E., & Carstens, D. (2024). Mimetic resentment’s violent somatechnics in permacrisis times: critical
         cartographical contours and coordinates. Somatechnics, 14(2), 139–161.
       Gilson, E. (2014). The ethics of vulnerability: a feminist analysis of social life and practice. Routledge.
       Hartman, S. (1997). Scenes of subjection: terror, slavery, and self-making in nineteenth-century america.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Jütten, T. (2019). Adorno on hope. Philosophy and Social Criticism, 45(3), 284–306.
       Klein, M. (1975). [1958]) On the development of mental functioning. Envy and Gratitude (pp. 236–246).
         Delacorte.                                          
       Klein, M. (1986). [1935]) A contribution to the psychogenesis of manic-depressive states. In J. Mitchell
         (Ed.), Selected Melanie Klein (pp. 115–146). Penguin.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political aesthetics of cruelty: contemporary authoritarian politics… Page 19 of 19 33
       Lugones, M. (2007). Heterosexualism and the colonial modern gender system. Hypatia, 22(1), 186–209.
       Mackenzie, C., Rogers, W., & Dodds, S. (Eds.). (2013). Vulnerability: New essays in ethics and feminist
         philosophy. Oxford University Press.                
       Martínez Ruiz, R. (2021). Eros beyond the death drive. Fordham University.
       McKittrick, K. (Ed.). (2015). Sylvia wynter: On being human as praxis. Duke University Press.
       Merlin, N. (2025). La Libertad Avanza y el Goce de la Crueldad. In F. Rosemberg (Ed.), El Goce de la
         Crueldad: Argentina en Tiempos de Milei (pp. 67–80). Ediciones Continente.
       Muñoz, J. E. (2009). Cruising utopia: The then and there of queer futurity. New York University.
       Ni Una Menos. (2019). Amistad política + inteligencia colectiva: Documentos y manifiestos 2015–2018.
         Ni Una Menos.                                       
       Plot, M. (2009). The democratico-political: social flesh and political forms in lefort and merleau-ponty.
         Theory & Event, 12(4), n/a. h t t p s : / / w w w . p r o q u e s t . c o m / s c h o l a r l y - j o u r n a l s / d e m o c r a t i c o - p o l i t i c a l - s o c i
         a l - fl e s h - f o r m s - l e f o r t / d o c v i e w / 2 1 0 8 2 9 7 5 4 / s e - 2 (Accessed: 8 November 2024).
       Pulkkinen, T., & Abadia, C., M. (Eds.). 2020 Special Issue on ‘Vulnerability’ within Contemporary Femi-
         nist Politics and Theory. Redescriptions, 2(23).    
       Quijano, A. (2000). Coloniality of power, eurocentrism, and latin america. Nepantla: Views from South,
         1(3), 533–580.                                      
       Rancière, J. (2013). The politics of aesthetics: the distribution of the sensible. Edited and translated by
         Gabriel Rockhill. London: Bloomsbury.               
       Rodriguez, S., Ben-Moshe, L., & Rakes, H. (2020). Carceral protectionism and the perpetually (in)vulner-
         able. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 20(5), 537–550.
       Rottemberg, E. (2012). Cruelty and its vicissitudes: jacques derrida and the future of psychoanalysis. The
         Southern Journal of Philosophy, 50 Spindel Supplement, 143–159.
       Sabsay, L. (2016a). The political imaginary of sexual freedom. Palgrave.
       Sabsay, L. (2016b). Permeable bodies: vulnerability, affective powers, hegemony. In J. Butler, Z. Gam-
         betti, & L. Sabsay (Eds.), Vulnerability in Resistance (pp. 278–302). Duke University Press.
       Sabsay, L. (2020a). The political aesthetics of vulnerability and the feminist revolt. Critical Times, 3(2),
         179–199.                                            
       Sabsay, L. (2020b). Beyond populist borders: embodiment and the people in laclau’s political ontology.
         Theory & Event, 23(3), 810–833.                     
       Sabsay, L. (2022). Gender(Ed.) violence in neo-authoritarian times. Cultural Dynamics, 35(1–2), 29–46.
       Said, E. (1995 [1978]) Orientalism. London: Penguin.  
       Semán, P. (Ed.). (2024). Esta entre Nosotros. Siglo XXI.
       Sours, J. (1961). Freud and the philosophers. Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 35(4), 326–345.
       Spivak, G. C. (1999). A critique of postcolonial reason: toward a history of the vanishing present. Harvard
         University Press.                                   
       Tokatlian, J. G. (2018). Una internacional reaccionaria. Crisis, 6 December, n/p. h t t p s : / / r e v i s t a c r i s i s . c o m .
         ar / n o t a s / u n a - i n t e r n a c i o n a l - r e a c c i o n a r i a (Accessed: 6 December 2024).
       Toscano, A. (2023). Late fascism: Race, Capitalism and the Politics of Crisis. Verso.
       Traverso, E. (2018). Las Nuevas Caras de la Derecha. Siglo XXI.
       Tudor, A. (2023). The anti-feminism of anti-trans feminism. European Journal of Women’s Studies, 30(2),
         290–302.                                            
       Wilson Gilmore, R. (2022). Abolition geography: essays towards liberation. Verso.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Leticia Sabsay is associate professor of gender and contemporary culture at the department of gender
       studies, London School of Economics and Political Science. Her work interrogates the entanglement
       of political identifications, gender and embodiment. She has written extensively on sexual politics and
       the mobilisation of ideals of freedom, justice, and democracy across transnational contexts. Her current
       research is focused on the psychosocial dynamics of contemporary authoritarian trends. She is the author
       of The Political Imaginary of Sexual Freedom (Palgrave, 2016) and has co-edited with Judith Butler and
       Zeynep Gambetti, Vulnerability in Resistance (Duke, 2016). In Spanish, she authored the monographs Las
       Normas del Deseo: Imaginario Sexual y Comunicación (Cátedra, 2009) and Fronteras Sexuales: Espacio
       Urbano, Cuerpos y Ciudadanía (Paidós, 2011).          