[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:858–861       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00749-w            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Active and passive citizens: a defense of majoritarian
       democracy                                             
                                                             
       Richard Tuck, Princeton University Press, 2024, vi + 195pp., ISBN:
       978-0-6912-4279-8                                     
                                                             
       Jacob Abolafia1                                       
                                                             
       Published online: 17 February 2025                    
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Reading Richard Tuck’s Active and Passive Citizens, one is reminded of John Stu-
       art Mill’s (1989, p. 48) half-begrudging recollection: ‘[W]ith what a salutary shock
       did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode like bombshells in the midst…of one-sided
       opinion.’ Tuck’s book shows that Rousseau’s thinking has lost none of its explosive
       power, and his latter-day Rousseauian argument for radical majoritarian democracy
       should produce a ‘salutary shock’ of its own.         
         In the book’s first chapter, Tuck tosses grenade after grenade into the conven-
       tional wisdom about Rousseau. Of special note is his contention that ‘Rousseau
       genuinely believed in universal participation as a basis for a legal order’ (p. 30).
       This ‘universal participation’ includes not only women, but basically all residents
       (habitants) of a bordered polity, a view Tuck grounds in the actual voting habits of
       the societies Rousseau knew best, including pre-Revolutionary France and Geneva.
         Tuck offers a similarly radical elucidation of the most perplexing of the ‘para-
       doxes’ Rousseau left for his readers—the meaning and significance of the ‘general
       will.’ According to Tuck, we can cut the Gordian knot of conflicting terminologies
       and descriptions: Rousseau’s general will just is the will of all. What makes this will
       general, the famous ‘unanimity’ of the general will, is ‘each citizen’s willingness to
       makes the majority will of the society his own, once the vote has taken place’ (p.
       34). This deflation of the general will to a form of non-metaphysical majoritarianism
       demystifies Rousseau’s theory of democratic legitimacy, making it more available
       for use in contemporary debates.                      
         The book’s second chapter aims ‘to defend a theory of this Rousseauian kind
       against its modern critics,’ particularly those who make representation rather than
       the activity of voting ‘the essence of democracy’ (p. 45). Against both economis-
       tic skepticism about the possible significance of any one person’s vote and the
       *                                                     
         Jacob Abolafia                                      
         jacobabo@bgu.ac.il                                  
       1 Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 8443944 Beersheba, Israel
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Active and passive citizens: a defense of majoritarian… 859
                                                             
       view common among deliberative democrats that popular will formation should
       approximate the unforced force of the better argument, Tuck makes a case for
       democracy as self-rule by majority rule. For Rousseau it is the action of mak-
       ing the law for myself that legitimates law. And, Tuck continues, all things being
       equal, it is the prospect of being part of an efficacious political majority that is
       my best chance of structuring my own world through law in the way that I want.
         Here, the broad democratic boundary and ex post definition of the ‘unanim-
       ity’ of the general will play an important justificatory role. In the iterative game
       of democracy, ‘there will almost always be new possibilities for me to get some
       of what I want if I can ally in some way with enough of my fellow citizens’ (p.
       56). This view of shifting majorities requires that there not be any supervening
       ‘partial associations’ (p. 34) which would lock a particular majority in place and
       prevent some part of the electorate from having a reasonable hope of accomplish-
       ing their aims.                                       
         There are at least three striking aspects of this theory of ‘active citizenship’ and
       majoritarian democracy. The first is its model of democratic collective action as ‘a
       kind of civilized and domesticated version of a mob’ (p. 64). This puts the Rous-
       seauian position much closer to a minimalist, ‘realist’ theory of democracy, where
       the legitimating force of the majority still carries a trace of the physical force of the
       many citizens gathering together to ensure that their will is carried out.
         The second is the essential relationship it draws between radical majoritarian-
       ism and an inclusive notion of the democratic boundary. Such a radically inclusive
       notion of who can vote shifts the focus of democratic politics from the (often iden-
       titarian) struggle over civil or constitutional rights to the maintenance of political
       rights expressed by voting in both elections and plebiscites. This is an intriguing
       shift that deserves to be worked out more fully, whether by Tuck or by Rousseauians
       to come. One implication, only hinted at in Tuck’s text, is that a polity where citi-
       zens are guaranteed a form of equal political voice, without the divisions of ‘partial
       association,’ will be one where the basic interests of citizens (interests which include
       their basic freedoms, one presumes) are likely to be honored (cf. Rousseau, 1997, p.
       50).                                                  
         The last is its conceptualization of the crisis of contemporary democracies as the
       consequence of blockages of democratic agency. In Tuck’s formulation, representa-
       tive constitutional democracies have erected ‘strong institutional barriers’ to the pos-
       sible efficacy of mass majoritarian politics (p. 147), and ‘a mass electorate cannot be
       denied its power indefinitely without something like civil war being the result’ (p.
       148). Majorities like those in the United States are defecting from democratic insti-
       tutions because they have been denied effective participation both in and by those
       same institutions.                                    
         The argument ends on an equivocal note. On the one hand, it extends the idea of
       radical democracy from Rousseau toward Marx, suggesting that only the unshackled
       collective action of a democratic majority will be able to counteract the social power
       of the market and the privatized despotism of financial elites. On the other hand, as
       Tuck admits, ‘the social base of a confident democracy [has] been eroded’ (p. 69).
       It is no longer clear that citizens are willing to make the gracious performance of ex
       post unanimity that his version of democratic will formation needs.

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       860                                       J. Abolafia 
                                                             
         The greatest unanswered question in Active and Passive Citizens regards the cul-
       tural conditions for the formation of a democratic public. Even the ‘thin’ general
       will that Tuck finds in Rousseau must be subject to the condition of ex post una-
       nimity, or, to cite a crucial passage from Letters Written from the Mountain: Were
       a given electoral outcome ‘bad in itself, take it all together; by that alone it will
       become the best’ (p. 37).                             
         This idea of ex post unanimity may not be a ‘morally demanding’ condition in the
       traditional sense of Republican virtue. Nevertheless, it does seem to be culturally
       specified—if not in the identitarian sense that Tuck rebels against (p. 137), then in
       the thinner sense of the shared civic bonds that enable social trust. Tuck acknowl-
       edges as much when he identifies the broad participation in forms of life like labor
       unions, or the sense of a shared fate engendered by wars of mass mobilization, as
       forces that made mass democracy successful in the 20th century. In the end, Tuck
       insists that these conditions themselves can be relatively thin—they are the ‘politi-
       cal and economic transformations’ of institutions (Tuck cites Rousseau’s Considera-
       tions on Poland), rather than some more nebulous cultural conditions (p. 147).
         But curiously absent from the discussion (except for a single mention of ‘civic
       faith’ in Melissa Schwartzberg’s response, p. 89) is Rousseau’s own famous state-
       ment on civil religion in the eighth chapter of the fourth book of The Social Con-
       tract. As Tuck showed masterfully in The Sleeping Sovereign (2016), Rousseau
       self-consciously took his ideas about political unity from Hobbes. Here, Rousseau
       associates Hobbesian unity with ‘reuniting the two heads of the eagle,’ that is, with
       an Erastian insistence on a public religion, controlled by the state. Content of this
       ‘civic faith’ with its ‘sentiments of sociability’ is less important than its structural
       role (1997, p. 150). Civic faith is very clearly a condition of citizenship—the Sover-
       eign can ‘banish from the state’ anyone who is deemed to contravene it. It may not
       be correct to think of this as a moral condition for democratic participation, but it is
       obviously some sort of cultural rather than institutional condition.
         In short, it does not seem like a Rousseauian account of radical democracy can
       do without a fuller theory of the cultural conditions of its own possibility. There
       is some reason to think that Marx and Engels, whom Tuck identifies as the right-
       ful heirs of Rousseauian radical democracy, viewed Rousseau’s theory in this way.
       In ‘On the Jewish Question,’ Marx quotes The Social Contract at length, and the
       whole essay is really an elucidation of Rousseau’s notion that ‘all institutions which
       put man in contradiction with himself are worthless’ (Rousseau, 1997, p. 147). Of
       course, Marx saw himself as transcending Rousseau by extending the same auton-
       omy through collective action that Rousseau identified in politics into all aspects of
       social life. But so doing, he honored his predecessor’s observation that social condi-
       tions could be constitutive for or deadly to the free exercise of democratic power,
       which is, in Tuck’s words, ‘at its best a transparent and organized way of controlling
       our common life’ (p. 129).                            
         Active and Passive Citizens is required reading for those hoping to understand
       why electoral majorities today seem to act in ways that threaten to damage the very
       foundations of democratic political life. But it remains for future Rousseauians to
       show us how we can best hope to guarantee the social conditions that might make
       possible a contemporary radical democracy in the tradition of Rousseau.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Active and passive citizens: a defense of majoritarian… 861
       Funding Open access funding provided by Ben-Gurion University.
                                                             
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as
       you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
       mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article
       are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
       material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is
       not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen
       ses/ by/4. 0/.                                        
       References                                            
                                                             
       Mill, J.S. (1989) ‘On Liberty’ and other writings. Cambridge University Press.
       Rousseau, J.-J. (1997). The social contract and other later political writings. Translated by Victor Goure-
         vitch. Cambridge University Press.                  
       Tuck, R. (2016) The sleeping sovereign. Cambridge University Press.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             