[PAGE 1]
et al. [full author details at the end of the article]       
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:26            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00795-y            
       CRITICAL EXCHANGE                                     
                                                             
       Prison abolition                                      
                                                             
       Anna Terwiel1 · Elizabeth Jordie Davies2 · Andrew Dilts3 · Nazlı Konya4 ·
       Quinn Lester5 · Victoria Scott6 · Sarah Tyson7        
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition and political theory                 
                                                             
       Criminalization, militarized policing, and imprisonment are at the heart of the Trump
       regime. In line with the 2024 campaign promise to conduct the largest deportation
       program in U.S. history, undocumented immigrants have been the first and most vul-
       nerable targets of attack. Immigration detention is at an all-time high due to escalat-
       ing arrests by federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) officers and the
       collaboration of local jails and police departments (Prison Policy Initiative, 2025).
                                                             
         Anna Terwiel                                        
         anna.terwiel@trincoll.edu                           
         Elizabeth Jordie Davies                             
         ejdavies@uci.edu                                    
         Andrew Dilts                                        
         andrew.dilts@lmu.edu                                
         Nazlı Konya                                         
         nazli.konya@colby.edu                               
         Quinn Lester                                        
         qlester1@jh.edu                                     
         Victoria Scott                                      
         toriscottpro@gmail.com                              
         Sarah Tyson                                         
         Sarah.K.Tyson@ucdenver.edu                          
       1 Trinity College, Hartford, CT 06106, USA            
       2 University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA     
       3 Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles, CA 90045, USA
       4 Colby College, Waterville, ME 04901, USA            
       5 Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA  
       6 Independent Scholar, Rockland, ME 04841, USA        
       7 University of Colorado, Denver, CO 80217, USA       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 2 of 28                        A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       Spectacles of domination—televised ICE raids, the deployment of national guard
       troops to major cities, men with shaved heads crammed in cages at the El Salvadoran
       prison CECOT, the opening of ‘Alligator Alcatraz’—serve the dual purpose of pro-
       jecting force and spreading fear in immigrant communities. Possessing a visa offers
       scant protection. The Supreme Court has allowed ICE to stop people on the basis of
       race, speaking Spanish, or employment, and the Trump administration is eviscerating
       already limited due process protections for people in immigration detention (Bry-
       ant, 2025). When the administration admitted that the deportation of Maryland resi-
       dent Kilmar Abrego Garcia to El Salvador and his monthslong detention in CECOT
       had been an ‘administrative error’, it resisted returning Abrego Garcia to the United
       States and pushed for criminal charges against him. Meanwhile, the State Department
       has been revoking visas of people whose speech it deems ‘counter to U.S. interests’,
       a weaponization of immigration law that is part of broader efforts to muzzle critics,
       which include federal funding cuts for universities as well as state lawmaking to
       criminalize peaceful protest against Israel’s war in Gaza and climate change. The
       Trump administration has also criminalized gender-affirming care for minors, which,
       along with the criminalization or severe restriction of abortion, makes women and
       trans people vulnerable to arrest. Finally, the administration is making the criminal
       legal system more punitive: Trump has ended the federal moratorium on the death
       penalty and Attorney General Pam Bondi has directed federal prosecutors to seek
       long mandatory minimum sentences.                     
         Though marginalized in political theory, the prison abolitionist tradition is a pow-
       erful resource to help us understand this political moment, how we got here, and offer
       hopeful but realistic visions of a different democratic future. As I discuss in Prison
       Abolition for Realists (Terwiel, 2025), abolitionist scholars and activists since the
       1960s have examined the criminal legal system and found neither righteous justice
       nor effective crime control but rather state violence that entrenches inequality, nor-
       malizes domination, and tends to detract from redistributive and welfarist approaches
       to safety and justice. Although prosecutors and judges act in the name of the people
       to enforce democratically authorized laws, abolitionists help us see that criminal pun-
       ishment does not simply express or protect democracy: it also endangers it. Criminal
       punishment defines people by acts of lawbreaking and creates the binary identities
       of ‘criminals’ and ‘law-abiding citizens’ (Foucault, 1995; Hulsman, 1986). Punish-
       ment thus easily becomes a vehicle for shoring up exclusionary conceptions of citi-
       zenship, which in societies marked by the afterlives of slavery and colonialism are
       racialized as white (Dilts, 2014). Prisons preserve rightlessness, domination, forced
       labor, and violence inside political orders that imagine themselves to be governed by
       individual rights and freedoms (Davis, 2003). As incarcerated people in New York’s
       Attica Prison attested in the manifesto that accompanied their 1971 uprising, ‘we do
       not know how the present system of brutality and dehumanization and injustices has
       been allowed to be perpetrated in this day of enlightenment, but we are the living
       proof of its existence and we cannot allow it to continue’ (Attica Liberation Fac-
       tion, 2011). The common belief that people bring such treatment upon themselves by
       breaking the social contract obscures the fact that poor people of color are policed,
       arrested, and convicted at higher rates than whites as well as our collective responsi-
       bility for growing economic inequality and concentrated poverty (Prison Policy Ini-

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                     Page 3 of 28 26  
                                                             
       tiative, n.d.). Instead of fostering solidarity and interdependence or building skills for
       navigating interpersonal conflict and repairing harm, criminal punishment deepens
       individualism and habituates us to seeing others as disposable.
         From an abolitionist perspective, the punitive authoritarianism of the Trump
       regime looks more like an escalation of longstanding tough-on-crime policies and
       carceral state-building than a break with the liberal-democratic past. In the words of
       abolitionist thinker and activist Mariame Kaba, ‘we did not get here yesterday’ (Kaba
       and Heyes, 2025). Where many commentators look for historical parallels in 1930s
       Europe (the rise of fascism) or the 1950s United States (McCarthyism), we might also
       consider the late 1960s and early 1970s, when law-and-order discourse justified the
       violent repression of anti-racist and anti-capitalist social movements and the expan-
       sion of the punishment apparatus that would become a pillar of the neoliberal state.
       Revolutionary Black abolitionists George Jackson and Angela Y. Davis interpreted
       the punitive, counterrevolutionary politics of this moment as fascistic, and advocated
       for prison abolition as part of transnational socialist and decolonial democratic strug-
       gles (Jackson, 1972; Davis, 2016; see also Lester in this Critical Exchange). Prison
       uprisings spread across Western Europe and North America in this period, along with
       and amplified by abolitionist thinking and organizing. Despite this resistance, the
       final decades of the twentieth century saw incarceration rates rise across the global
       north, most dramatically so in the United States where by 2007, one in a hundred
       adults was incarcerated and the country held a quarter of the world’s prisoners. The
       criminalization of immigration or ‘crimmigration’ was part of this punitive state-
       building and eroded boundaries between federal immigration enforcement and local
       policing, courts, jails, and prisons as well as welfare institutions, schools, and hospi-
       tals (Carens, 2008; Gottschalk, 2016). The current gutting of federal agencies such
       as the Environmental Protection Agency and defunding of Medicaid, research, and
       the arts while increasing spending on the military and immigration enforcement is a
       grotesque inversion of abolitionist demands to defund the criminal legal system and
       direct the social wage toward life-sustaining institutions (Gilmore, 2007).
         What is to be done? A common misconception is that abolitionists only ‘say no’,
       when they, in fact, advance a range of political projects and visions. These visions are
       hopeful and ambitious, often revolutionary, but that does not make them fantastical
       or utopian. In their contribution to this Critical Exchange, Victoria Scott and Nazlı
       Konya, for instance, offer concrete proposals for challenging what they theorize as
       the epistemic injustice at the heart of mass incarceration: ‘The systematic silencing,
       neglect, and discrediting’ of incarcerated people and ‘the invisibilization of mass
       incarceration as a question of public concern’ (see Scott and Konya, this Critical
       Exchange). For Scott and Konya, this epistemic injustice can be resisted by attend-
       ing to and disseminating incarcerated people’s knowledge beyond prison walls, as
       happened in the Maine-based Freedom and Captivity (F&C) Curriculum Project in
       which the authors participated. These kinds of initiatives might seem reformist, but
       Scott and Konya see in them efforts ‘to carve out spaces for dignified life’ that also
       disrupt carceral culture and prefigure a world that supports everyone’s capacities for
       ‘intellectual freedom, emotional flourishing, and political agency’ (this exchange),
       even when people have harmed others.                  

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 4 of 28                        A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
         Where Scott and Konya focus on the violence of incarceration and highlight the
       importance of incarcerated people’s knowledge to the practice of abolition, Elizabeth
       Jordie Davies connects prison abolition to other abolitionist struggles against slavery
       and policing. In her contribution, Davies theorizes abolition as an enduring Black
       social movement that combines refusals of anti-Blackness with rehearsals of free-
       dom, through ‘refusing exploitation/rehearsing Black self-determination; refusing
       punishment/rehearsing Black humanity; and refusing suspicions/rehearsing Black
       belonging’ (Davies, this exchange). For Davies, abolition challenges political theory
       and political science to ‘engage with practitioners and theorists in the tradition of
       Black freedom-making’, who are commonly marginalized within the discipline (this
       exchange).                                            
         Quinn Lester both answers and exceeds this call in his essay on Angela Davis’s
       notion of ‘abolition democracy’, which describes her normative political vision for
       abolition. Davis borrows the term from W. E. B. Du Bois’s Black Reconstruction
       in America to convey that abolition must be both a process of dismantling oppres-
       sive systems and of building new institutions to support the political participation of
       the emancipated and meet their basic needs. The failure of Radical Reconstruction
       after the Civil War meant that slavery could be replaced by other forms of racial and
       economic domination, from Jim Crow to mass incarceration (Davis, 2005). Where
       Davies places abolition squarely in Black revolutionary and antifascist traditions,
       Lester explores its relation to the Frankfurt School. After all, Angela Davis studied
       with Herbert Marcuse as an undergraduate and again as a graduate student, after
       an aborted stint with Theodor Adorno at the Institute for Social Research in Frank-
       furt. In the past few years, political theorists have begun to study Davis as a critical
       theorist (James, 2024; Sebastian, 2024; previously Allen, 2007). This is an exciting
       development in abolitionist thought that could contribute to ongoing efforts to rethink
       the past and present of critical theory and its relationship to Europe, whiteness, and
       coloniality (Allen, 2016; Leeb et al., 2018).         
         Lester, Sarah Tyson, and Andrew Dilts all find in abolition a dialectical vision
       of change that not only refuses prisons and their enabling conditions but seeks to
       overcome them. In his contribution, Lester argues that Marcuse’s notion of a ‘non-
       repressive society’ could enrich Davis’s ‘thin’ account of abolition democracy by
       ‘showing how a dialectical method is crucial to abolitionist politics’. ‘Incipient and
       utopian possibilities within the now must be identified and worked on’, he says,
       ‘revealing abolition democracy as both an overcoming and a working through con-
       temporary capitalism’ (Lester, this exchange).Tyson and Dilts use the term ‘affirma-
       tive negation’ to name the forces of abolition, anarchism, and decolonization that
       refuse intolerable institutions and practices while also affirming values that make
       those intolerable things no longer feel necessary’ (Tyson and Dilts, this exchange).
       Tyson and Dilts include capitalism and anti-Blackness in their list of intolerables but
       focus on the settler-colonial nation-state. They turn to abolitionist and decolonial
       thinkers Mariame Kaba, Glen Coulthard, and Leanne Betasamosake Simpson and
       Robyn Maynard to illuminate not only the violence these states inflict on racialized
       and Indigenous people but also the practices that prefigure alternative systems of
       governance.                                           

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                     Page 5 of 28 26  
                                                             
         All four contributions show that prison abolition is a vibrant site of radical and
       revolutionary theory and practice, both practical and visionary, at the margins of
       political theory yet informed by many lineages of resistance and insurgent thought.
       As we face the expansion of punishment and criminalization, not only through the
       criminal legal system but also through assertions of extreme executive power, the
       words of the Attica prisoners still ring true. ‘We, the inmates of Attica Prison, say
       to you, the sincere people of society, the prison system…which your courts have
       rendered [us] unto is without question the authoritative fangs of a coward in power’.
                                              Anna Terwiel   
                                                             
       Knowledge production and political theorizing across prison walls
                                                             
       Public opinion about mass incarceration in the United States is fraught with contra-
       dictions. Americans tend to know that sexual abuse and physical harm are common
       inside prisons, yet they are reluctant to admit that ‘prisoners are treated inhumanely”
       (Dumitru, 2023). They are split on the question of whether too many or too few
       people are incarcerated, even though most acknowledge that it is ultimately the poor
       who are being locked up in greater numbers. A vast majority of Americans do not
       consider the level of incarceration to be a problem, even as the United States impris-
       ons more people per capita than any other nation; at the same time, nobody would
       want that outcome for themselves or their loved ones. The liminal space that prison
       occupies in public perception is most acutely described by Angela Davis: ‘the prison
       is present in our lives and, at the same time, it is absent from our lives … We take
       prisons for granted but are often afraid to face the realities they produce’ (2003, p.
       15). Rendered invisible and voiceless, imprisoned populations—and the physical,
       emotional, sexual, and economic violence they experience—do not always constitute
       subjects of public interest or scrutiny. We tend not to know what happens to people
       during or after incarceration, largely because we do not want to know. With close to
       two million people, disproportionately people of color and poor, confined in out-of-
       sight facilities, ‘apathy and ignorance’, as James Baldwin once said about Jim Crow,
       is still ‘the price we pay for segregation’ (Baldwin, 1963, 12’10’’).
         The apathy and ignorance surrounding prisons suggests that mass incarceration
       is not a matter of social justice alone. It is also a matter of epistemic justice that
       can be classified in two categories. One concerns the vast intellectual capacities and
       creative potentials subjugated by the carceral state. The human cost of incarceration,
       we argue, includes not only the forms of violence described above but also the sys-
       tematic silencing, neglect, and discrediting that diminish the imprisoned individuals’
       status as a ‘subject of knowledge and understanding’, suppressing their capability to
       serve as educators, mentors, or caregivers during and after incarceration (Medina,
       2017, p. 47). Despite possessing experiential wisdom about the criminal legal sys-
       tem, incarcerated populations are rarely included in political meaning- or decision-
       making; their contributions are refracted through, if not preemptively shut down by,
       the stigmas of criminality. Thus the knowledges and meanings they produce, as Ori-
       sanmi Burton notes, largely ‘remai[n] criminalized, pathologized, and intentionally
       hidden from public view’ (2023, p. 7). Beyond exclusion from civic life, social rela-

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 6 of 28                        A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       tions, and networks of kinship and support—civil and social death (Guenther, 2013;
       James, 2004; Rodríguez, 2006)—prisoners experience what José Medina (2017, p.
       47) calls ‘hermeneutical death’, as they are radically constrained in terms of their
       communicative capacity and epistemic agency.          
         The second, related category of epistemic injustice we want to highlight is the
       invisibilization of mass incarceration as a question of public concern. This kind of
       injustice, grounded in imprisonment’s taken-for-granted status as the sole response
       to harm (Davis, 2003, p. 9), diverts public attention away from the dehumanizing
       operations of the prison system and public conscience away from the fact that the
       people we pathologize and punish as violent offenders are often themselves survivors
       of violence (Richie, 2012). The diversion of epistemic and moral responsibility away
       from the everyday atrocities of the penal system can be most aptly described as ‘will-
       ful hermeneutical ignorance’, given that there is no dearth of available hermeneutical
       resources (Pohlhaus, Jr., 2012, p. 716; Mills, 1997; Frye, 1983; Tuana, 2006). The
       problem, rather, is that dominantly-situated subjects cultivate hermeneutical attitudes
       that sustain their obliviousness to the interpretive resources developed by the mar-
       ginalized—subjects who can afford not to attend to certain aspects of the world, such
       as carcerality, white supremacy, poverty, and heteropatriarchal violence, from which
       they ‘receive identifiable material, psychic, and symbolic benefits and privileges’
       (Dilts, 2021, p. 197). As the carceral state sets up and maintains certain ways of think-
       ing and knowing that systematically justify the persistence of prisons despite their
       failure to fulfill their supposed functions, publics unaffected by the harms of carcer-
       ality remain complicit with a system that produces trauma, exploitation, separation,
       and mental and physical deterioration.                
         One way to disrupt this cycle of complicity and to resist epistemic violence against
       incarcerated communities, we argue, is to excavate and record the knowledge of peo-
       ple affected by incarceration and to build bridges for solidarity between people on
       the inside and those on the outside. Our home state, Maine, offers examples of such
       epistemic resistance, including, among others, a curriculum project based in restor-
       ative practices and a multi-prison think tank consisting of incarcerated fellows across
       all state prisons. In this contribution, we focus on the former, the Freedom & Captiv-
       ity (F&C) Curriculum Project, to illustrate how a group of incarcerated, formerly
       incarcerated, and never incarcerated people collaborated to envision alternatives to
       incarceration in the wake of harm and to challenge narratives about who is incarcer-
       ated and the presumption that incarceration is necessary for public safety. One of us
       has served as an incarcerated facilitator for an F&C course; the other has attended one
       of these courses as a non-incarcerated community member. Both of us are based in
       Maine, which has relatively low incarceration rates compared to other states (though
       still higher than most nations) and, at the same time, is unique for having no public
       defender office, some of the harshest and most racially disparate sentencing practices
       in the country, and a criminal code that does not allow for parole.
         The F&C Curriculum Project built on a recent statewide mobilization—joined
       by thousands of Mainers and fifty-two cultural, arts, social justice, and educational
       institutions throughout the state—to create a reservoir of de-carceral knowledge that
       included works by incarcerated artists, poets, and performers; community conversa-
       tions; film and podcast series; panel discussions; and more, all available on the F&C

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                     Page 7 of 28 26  
                                                             
       website (www.freedom-captivity.org). Using the materials assembled on the web-
       site, in 2022–23 the F&C team of system-impacted and aligned members developed
       three course curricula that invite participants to think in new ways about carcerality
       and noncarceral responses to harm, care, accountability, and liberation by engaging
       them in full- and small-group discussions that draw on art, poetry, historical analy-
       ses, videos, and other media. Since then, the three courses have been rotationally
       taught on Zoom by trained system-impacted facilitators. They are open to everyone
       on the inside and outside and guided by consensus-based community agreements.
       Importantly, when the F&C team was preparing to curate the curricula, its priorities
       included securing permissions for incarcerated members of the team to participate
       in the curation process. Another priority was to have incarcerated individuals serve
       as paid course facilitators. Though both required engaging in negotiations with the
       Maine Department of Corrections (DOC) and agreeing to some degree of surveil-
       lance, this approach has resulted in profound conversations about a host of topics,
       from the challenges of loss, repair, and forgiveness to the relationship between indi-
       vidual and collective liberation.                     
         The themes and questions addressed by the F&C curricula are at once universally
       relevant and intended to center the unique experiences of incarceration. By engaging
       participants in introspective analyses about society’s interpretations of crime (asking,
       for example, what difference there might be between crime and harm; what it means
       to police or be policed; or how crime historically was used to police people and for
       what purpose it was used), safety (what, respectively, community, safety, and safety
       in community look like; how policing might enable or hinder accountability), and
       justice (whether justice is the same as punishment; what restorative/transformative
       justice means and how it can apply to gender-based violence; how we might define
       accountability when people break laws to combat extreme forms of injustice), the
       F&C courses constitute a preliminary but crucial step toward reorienting the public’s
       habits of thought and sentiment away from punitive-retributive responses to harm
       and toward restorative-reparative ones. All curricula and facilitator guides, free to
       download, offer visions of epistemic resistance that involve, on one hand, creating
       public platforms for system-impacted people to share their cognitive-metaphysical
       understandings of freedom and captivity, and, on the other, generating opportunities
       for broader publics to liberate their imaginations from the confines of carcerality.
         These practices of collaborative knowledge production and dissemination join the
       longer tradition of thought and activism around prison abolition, including but not
       limited to impactful anthologies that contain writings by political prisoners (Chi-
       nosole, 1996; James, 2003; James, 2005), edited volumes that feature incarcerated
       and formerly incarcerated authors (Guenther and Zeman, 2015; Kim et al, 2018),
       and works that draw from writings by and personal conversations with imprisoned
       radical intellectuals (Burton, 2023; Rodríguez, 2006). Presenting examples of epis-
       temic resistance, these works showcase the abolitionist knowledge, theory, and praxis
       developed by incarcerated communities. Some scholars in this tradition attribute pris-
       oners’ critical insights largely to the conditions of programmatic state violence from
       which they emerge (Burton, 2023; James, 2003, 2005; Rodríguez, 2006). Describing
       prisons in terms of an ‘institutional capacity to immobilize, neutralize, or eliminate
       targeted populations’, Dylan Rodríguez, for instance, argues that dissident theories

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 8 of 28                        A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       and practices emerging in response to this institutional capacity are ‘substantively
       radical in their potential to disrupt or destroy a primary productive element of the
       existing social/carceral formation’ (2006, pp. 107–08). While we agree with Rodrí-
       guez and others that prisons are designed to debilitate and ‘break the will and inde-
       pendent thinking of the incarcerated’ (Sheldon, 1998, pp. 58–59 cited in Rodríguez,
       2006, 149), we caution that limiting incarcerated communities’ critical capacities
       only to those that emerge in spaces of unmediated state violence might obscure the
       abolitionist significance of the efforts of communities inside and outside, such as the
       F&C coalition, working to make prisons not be sites of hermeneutical death.
         The quest for intellectual freedom, emotional flourishing, and political agency
       behind bars is essential to advancing the struggle for dignified lives—lives that
       involve community connection, meaningful dialogue, intellectual activity, and non-
       exploitative economic participation—even as prisons, by their existence, deny people
       their humanity and dignity. F&C’s choice to work through the system, while holding
       decarceration as its ultimate objective, presents an effort to carve out spaces for digni-
       fied life, given that, as Erica Meiners reminds us, ‘there are real [people] in prisons
       and jails with real needs’ that urgently need addressing (2007, 170). Put differently,
       F&C’s negotiations with the Maine DOC can be seen as a pragmatic, incremental-
       istic approach to de-carceration, doing the ‘both/and’ of abolitionist work (Meiners,
       2007, p. 170; Kaba, 2021, p. 96; Konya and Scott, forthcoming). These kinds of
       negotiations carry potentials for creating alternative public spaces where incarcerated
       people are empowered to use their experiential wisdom to identify prisons as systems
       of violence and trauma and to work toward shifting the carceral culture. We thus
       maintain that what makes prisoners’ epistemic activities radical is their capacities
       for, to borrow from F&C member Linda Small, ‘breaking down barriers to connec-
       tion, communication, understanding, meaning making with other people’ (personal
       conversation with the authors). Learning from F&C, we understand abolitionist poli-
       tics in terms of a spectrum, valuing initiatives working both outside and within the
       criminal legal system ‘insofar as they unsettle existing ways of [carceral] thinking’
       (Terwiel, 2020, p. 437).                              
         F&C’s affirmation of incarcerated people as knowers also recalls the activism of
       the French Prisons Information Group (GIP), cofounded by Michel Foucault, whose
       professed aim was to create a public space where ‘prisoners [would] be able to say
       what is intolerable in the system of penal repression’ (GIP, 2021a, p. 93) or, as Fou-
       cault famously formulated it, to ‘give the floor’ to prisoners who have the political
       knowledge, awareness, and agency relevant to activism against oppression (Foucault,
       2021, p. 77). Through questionnaires, on-site reports, press conferences, and public
       demonstrations, the group strove to ‘make knowledge of incarceration, and of the
       daily experience of prisoners themselves, truly become a part of the public domain’
       (Defert, 2021, p. 44) and make complicit publics become ‘intolerant of prisons’ (GIP,
       2021b, p. 66). While the GIP’s ‘intolerance-investigations’ were profoundly revela-
       tory and mobilizing, the accuracy of its claim to center the prisoners’ voices has been
       questioned by scholars who criticized the group for not quite giving incarcerated
       people the floor and instead foregrounding the ideas of the group’s male intellectuals,
       particularly Foucault (Brich, 2008), and failing to recognize the power differentials
       that played out in its relationship with oppressed populations (Spivak, 1988, p. 279).

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                     Page 9 of 28 26  
                                                             
         As was the case with the GIP, differences in power, privilege, and positionality
       pose important challenges to well-intentioned projects aiming to problematize the
       system of penal repression. For its part, the F&C curriculum project has navigated
       these challenges by prioritizing the direct participation of system-impacted people.
       At the time of the conception of the curriculum project, ten out of the fifteen people
       on the F&C team were impacted by incarceration; nine of those were currently or for-
       merly incarcerated. This meant that at least three fifths of each smaller working group
       responsible for creating one of the three curricula were people with a personal expe-
       rience of incarceration—which is to say, rather than being given to them, the floor
       was theirs from inception. Decision-making about content and structure, the system-
       impacted members confirm, was nonhierarchical and collaborative. To this date, all
       F&C courses have been facilitated by people with experience of incarceration; six
       of the eight facilitators have been inside facilitators. At the same time, cooperation
       with DOC remains tenuous, given the unpredictability of the department’s decision
       to grant or withhold approval for incarcerated facilitators’ participation. Working
       through such unpredictability, F&C continues to support returning community mem-
       bers in their transitions. While statutory mechanisms in Maine, much like elsewhere,
       prohibit formerly incarcerated people from obtaining licenses to practice knowledge
       and expertise even years after their release, and thus prolong hermeneutical silencing,
       the F&C project offers one pathway, however modest in scope, for system-impacted
       people to heal from hermeneutical injury. Such healing manifests the ‘healing jus-
       tice’—as theorized in the Movement for Black Lives and discussed by Deva Woodly
       (2022, pp. 85, 78)—that a ‘margin-to-center’ ethics and politics can offer.
         By reclaiming the floor and theorizing space, the F&C curators, contributors, and
       facilitators challenge prevalent assumptions about who qualifies as a knower and
       what constitutes credible intellectual production. This reclamation, just like our col-
       laborative writing and theorizing, materializes an epistemic resistance against the
       prison culture that strips incarcerated people of their humanity, personhood, agency,
       and voice. Through community-based knowledge projects such as F&C, imprisoned
       individuals, who are often discredited in terms of their intellectual competencies
       and made objects of research or activism, become subjects of meaning-making and
       mobilization. Even while operating under conditions of repression and disciplinary
       surveillance, they generate theories of captivity and liberation. Most important, their
       collaborative knowledge production and theorizing across the walls undermine the
       still-alive segregation that sustains society’s apathy and ignorance, generating new
       possibilities for thought and action to create a world where the prisons are no longer
       taken for granted.                                    
                                   Victoria Scott and Nazlı Konya
       Abolition in three movements: refusals and rehearsals for black
       freedom                                               
       Abolition is a global movement towards liberation. Broadly, abolition is a practice
       and political horizon that calls for the undoing of the status quo and the creation of
       life affirming institutions (Akbar, 2020; Davis, 2003; Kaba, 2021; Kaba and Ritchie,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 10 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       2022). Abolition as a Black social movement demands the end of anti-Black power
       relations, specifically, ‘death-making institutions’, as Mariame Kaba says, as well
       as the creation of a world where Black people thrive (Taylor, 2021). I argue that
       the principles of abolitionist movements, particularly as a Black social movement
       in the United States, work as a series of concerted refusals and ‘rehearsals’ (Gilm-
       ore and Tippett, 2023) over time. That is, abolition comprises Black people refusing
       anti-Blackness and rehearsing Black freedom. The principles of Black abolitionism
       I propose here include: refusing exploitation/ rehearsing Black self-determination;
       refusing punishment/ rehearsing Black humanity; and refusing suspicion/ rehears-
       ing Black belonging. Thus political theorists and political scientists should under-
       stand abolitionist movements as destructive to the current order and also constructive
       towards Black liberation, or comprising of, as Tyson and Dilts write in this critical
       exchange, both ‘negative and positive work’.          
         There are many abolitionist movements across different locales and these move-
       ments foreground various principles of freedom. In this contribution, I consider abo-
       lition as a Black revolutionary movement and part of the Black antifascist tradition in
       the US (Hope and Mullen, 2023). Specifically, I discuss the recurrence of abolitionist
       principles across 1) the abolition of chattel slavery, 2) the prison abolition move-
       ment, and 3) the police abolitionist movement. I choose these movements specifically
       to demonstrate the transhistorical linkages of Black abolitionist principles. Each of
       these movements rejects the degradation of Blackness in the United States– includ-
       ing the Black slave, the Black criminal, and the Black suspect– to create a fuller
       picture of Black life and humanity in the public sphere. These movements deal with
       the ‘problem’ of Black citizenship as it challenges white supremacy (Hesse, 2017, p.
       583). In concert with acts of resistance, these movements prompt theories of Black
       freedom-making practices that are often illegible to normative political and intellec-
       tual structures, requiring new ‘vocabularies’ to fully comprehend (Davis and Rodri-
       guez, 2000). Part of the work of abolitionists, then, is creating language and practices
       for a world beyond domination.                        
         By assessing these iterations of abolitionist movement, we see why abolition is
       ongoing and incomplete. Each abolitionist movement forms in response to the cre-
       ation or, even, the mutation, of white supremacist systems over time. Systemic repres-
       sion paints the most recent abolitionist movements—prison and police abolition—as
       practical impossibilities. Even so, abolitionism is ‘a motion of the mind’, almost
       faith-like in its visionary politics of Black liberation (Bambara, 2023). Abolitionist
       movements are bound to occur and reoccur due to the endurance of anti-Blackness
       and the drive for Black freedom.                      
         Abolitionist movements challenge political science and political theory to break
       through normative disciplinary structures by posing an invitation to attend to the
       principles of Black freedom-making. In this way, we can see how Black abolitionist
       social movements demand a reorientation towards the marginal, towards ‘the sub-
       stance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things unseen’ (Hebrews 11:1). Aboli-
       tion is not just a movement to destroy the social order, but it is a movement to create
       new and not yet established social relations (Dilts, 2019).
         A central thread of anti-Blackness is the desire to exploit Black people for capi-
       talist gain. Black exploitation was institutionalized via the African slave trade and

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 11 of 28 26  
                                                             
       chattel slavery in Europe and the Americas. Even with the abolition of slavery, the
       Black exploitation has continued over time, evident in other anti-Black institutions
       like prisons and police. Abolitionist resistance to these institutions includes a refusal
       of Black exploitation and a rehearsal of Black self-determination.
         Slavery, of course, is the core example of the exploitation of Black people forced
       to be workers for their lifetimes and their children’s lifetimes. This condition of ser-
       vitude curtailed any possibility of creating a life of one’s choosing. As Orlando Pat-
       terson writes, slavery imbued Black people with social death, objectifying them, and
       placing them in the realm of the ‘social non-person’ (Patterson, 1982). Despite being
       cut off from the social and the political, and as objects of the economic world, Black
       slaves nurtured their own interior lives and communities to pull through their days.
       Enslaved people insisted upon their personhood and determined the course of their
       lives through both extraordinary and minute methods. Survival is a promise (Gumbs,
       2024).                                                
         Though cross-racial solidarities were essential for mobilizing the abolition of slav-
       ery in the US, enslaved Black people made the peculiar institution untenable through
       various modes of refusal. These modes of refusal demonstrate the impossibility of
       fully destroying Black humanity—for to be human is to make choices about what one
       will and will not endure. This refusal includes outright rebellions and violent upris-
       ings (Schomburg Center, 2021; Heuman and Burnard, 2010). It includes the murder
       of overseers and masters (Franklin and Schweninger, 2000). Black enslaved people
       sued for their freedom, threatening the legal grounds of the institution of slavery
       (Konig, 2006; Schweninger, 2018). Enslaved people slowed work, prioritized care
       work of their own families, left plantations for days at a time, ran away altogether,
       and otherwise troubled the ebb and flow of their forced labor (Davis, 1971; Gilmore,
       2000; Hartman, 2016). We can see these refusals of Black exploitation as simultane-
       ously a movement of raised consciousness among the enslaved, as they rehearsed a
       world of Black self-determination.                    
         These refusals might have largely operated within the bounds of slavery (until,
       perhaps, a slave was able to run away), but they set personal courses of action that
       were at odds with oppression. In this way, abolition works as a mass threat to the
       political order that required the establishment of new laws to quell slave rebellion
       (i.e. The Fugitive Slave Laws), violent repression, and lynchings to counteract the
       threat of slave uprisings. Black people’s rehearsals of self-determination ultimately
       led to the Civil War and the abolition of the institution of slavery.
         Though the African slave trade was ended around the world, the exploitation
       of Black people would mutate into other anti-Black institutions and practices. In
       response, the language of abolition emerged once again—this time for a social move-
       ment against incarceration. The prison system, abolitionists argue, targets people
       of color and especially Black people. Furthermore, abolitionists assert that broader
       social ills that produce intra-community issues, like violence and harm, are addressed
       via prison and, as a result, remain unsolved and create a pipeline from Black com-
       munities to incarceration.                            
         But how does abolition apply to prison? That is, why does the movement against
       prison evoke the movement against slavery? Prison abolitionists point to the relation-
       ship between slavery and incarceration as articulated in the Thirteenth Amendment,

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 12 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       where slavery and involuntary servitude is abolished in the United States– except as
       punishment for a crime (Davis and Rodriguez, 2000; Gilmore, 2000). This leaves the
       abolition of slavery itself incomplete. Angela Davis, a key theorist and practitioner of
       prison abolition, says that prison abolition is a ‘long-range goal’, as was the abolition
       of slavery (Davis and Rodriguez, 2000, p. 215).       
         This iteration of abolition is a refusal of punishment and a rehearsal for Black
       humanity. The legal humanization of Black people began with the abolition of slav-
       ery, and the principle of Black humanity reoccurs in the prison abolitionist movement.
       Prison abolition refuses the idea that Black people deserve unique, disproportionate,
       or perpetual punishment. Beyond the fact that incarceration is often used to suppress
       Black radical politics or to unjustly imprison the innocent, prison abolition asserts
       that even those who do wrong or hurt others deserve to be treated humanely and
       rehabilitated.                                        
         Prison abolitionists argue that the prison is a dehumanizing institution that begets
       civic and social death to the incarcerated– much like slavery. Prison also functions as
       a site of labor exploitation and coercion. Prison extends the process of punishment
       and does not repair harm or rehabilitate people. Scott and Konya argue in this critical
       exchange that, beyond physical constraints, prison also dampens intellectual lives
       and creative capacities of the incarcerated. Prison abolitionists argue that prison is
       discriminatory, that it creates unjust power relations within prison walls, and deci-
       mates communities outside of prisons. As an institution, prison can be seen as on par
       with slavery as a site of control and punishment of Black people– ending their self-
       determination and dehumanizing them. Davis argues that punishment itself is linked
       to dominance, including ‘poverty, racism, sexism, [and] homophobia’ (Davis and
       Rodriguez, 2000, p. 217).                             
         Though the prison abolitionist movement has not accomplished its broader goal
       as slavery abolition has, the movement rehearses a world where all Black people
       are treated with humanity. These rehearsals include reducing prison populations and
       drawing attention to the unjust nature of incarceration for drug offenses (Alexander,
       2010; Allen, 2024; Berman, 2010; Turner et al., 2015). This means drawing public
       attention to the exploitative use of private prisons (O’Carroll, 2017). This includes
       campaigns to ‘ban the box’, or the marker that one has once been incarcerated on a
       job application form (Von Bergen and Bressler, 2016). Importantly, in an essential
       move for Black humanity, activists have fought and won many campaigns to end
       the death penalty in 23 states (Death Penalty Information Center, 2025; Steiker and
       Steiker, 2020).                                       
         The prison abolitionist movement carries forth the ethos of abolition and its goal
       to re-humanize the incarcerated. And by (re)claiming abolition, the movement works
       to end all vestiges of Black slavery in the US by decoupling punishment and justice.
       Thus, while the movement is still visionary, abolition provides a lens to imagine ways
       to reduce prisons’ effects by forcing people to ask: what can be undone and what can
       we do to replace this institution with something more life affirming? Prison abolition
       alters the social order towards Black humanity above all.
         The movement for prison abolition is closely tied to the police abolitionist move-
       ment. Police abolitionists refuse Black suspicion and rehearse Black people’s right
       to belong in public– to move, gather, and be visible without being seen as a threat

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 13 of 28 26  
                                                             
       that warrants violent control (Jackson, 2019). It is an old effort and cause, as polic-
       ing Black people is seen as the right of every white person. And with the advent of
       social media, this problem became hypervisible as Black people began to discuss,
       mourn, and share stories and videos of anti-Black police violence and murder in
       the 2010s. The seemingly unending list of names of Black people– Trayvon Martin,
       Rekia Boyd, Michael Brown, Eric Garner, Sandra Bland, Tamir Rice, Walter Scott,
       and so on and so forth– mobilized a new generation of young Black activists towards
       police abolition (Hooker, 2016; Ransby, 2018; Taylor, 2016).
         Reform was largely the first tactic these organizers reached for– including solu-
       tions like body cameras and police demilitarization (Movement for Black Lives,
       2016; BYP100, 2014). Some of these tactics included abolition aligned goals to
       reduce police power and presence. However, as movement organizers realized that
       reforms failed to prevent Black death, and with mentoring from activists in the prison
       abolitionist movement, the BLM mass movement began to more robustly advocate
       for police abolition.                                 
         As prison abolition is ongoing and incomplete, so is police abolition. However, the
       BLM mass movement has importantly made widely visible a Black common sense:
       that police are disproportionately violent and suspicious of Black people (Woodly,
       2015). Beyond the movement, the growth in public awareness and mobilization
       against police violence can be seen with the number of white participants in the
       2020 uprisings for George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and Ahmaud Arbery. In addition,
       ‘defund the police’, an abolitionist demand, took hold of the cultural zeitgeist as
       police abolitionist Mariame Kaba wrote a New York Times article ‘Yes We Literally
       Mean Abolish the Police’ (Kaba, 2020).                
         Police abolition, like all abolitionist movements, is a social reorientation towards,
       as Quinn Lester writes in this critical exchange, a ‘non-repressive society’. Police
       abolition says that Black people belong in the American polity and are no more likely
       to be guilty of crime or violence than any other person. Police abolitionists also
       demand life affirming institutions, like alternative emergency responders in moments
       of danger. They demand the diversion of public funding from police to community
       institutions, like schools, hospitals, mental health centers, and job creation. Police
       abolition shows that, beyond changing institutions, abolitionist movements are about
       changing people.                                      
         As anti-Black institutions emerge and endure, abolitionist movements are there to
       refuse death and rehearse freedom for Black people. Abolitionist movements provide
       rich ground for political science and political theory to engage with practitioners and
       theorists in the tradition of Black freedom-making. To write and think about aboli-
       tion necessarily means crossing normative and canonical boundaries, and pushing
       against disciplinary structures that simply have not provided a path to Black free-
       dom (Davies, 2025). Furthermore, political theorists must remember that abolition
       incorporates both destructive and constructive practices, such that Black people are
       challenging old orders as they seek to establish new ones. If ‘freedom is a place’, then
       Black abolitionists are forging a path, creating theories and honing their methods to
       find a way forward (Gilmore and Tippett, 2023).       
                                        Elizabeth Jordie Davies

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 14 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
       Abolition democracy as a non-repressive society       
                                                             
                                                             
         In my remarks at that conference, delivered from the same podium where my
         teacher Herbert Marcuse had spoken forty years earlier, I acknowledged what
         a great privilege it was then, and remains today, to have been his student and to
         have had him as my mentor.                          
                                                             
         Davis et al., 2017, p. vii)                         
                                                             
       Angela Davis’s acknowledgement of Herbert Marcuse as her teacher is not in itself
       odd, as references to Marcuse’s importance are replete across her writings. Yet
       while Davis frequently references Marcuse’s importance as her teacher, her work
       is strangely silent on how his ideas might have shaped Davis’s own thinking. Those
       few scholars who have already repeated the fascinating biographical facts of Mar-
       cuse’s impact on Davis’s life have not yet dived deep into Marcuse’s influence on
       Davis, and this is especially true of Davis’s post-1990’s work on prison abolition
       and abolition democracy (Farr, 2017; Shabazz, 2024; cf. Sebastian, 2024; Ferguson,
       2024). This contribution contends that Marcuse’s impact on Davis is more than just
       biographical. In paying close attention to Marcuse’s work theorizing a non-repressive
       society, I argue that we can both flesh out Davis’s abolition democracy and restore
       its relevance for understanding anti-fascist politics today. Davis’s many invocations
       of abolition democracy are often in the form of what I have elsewhere called ‘thin
       description’ through such formulations as tearing down and building up, or the cre-
       ation of a society without the need for prisons (Lester, 2021). Indebted to Davis,
       many prison abolitionists point to these formulations even as Davis has left vague
       what is transformative precisely about abolition itself (Davis et al., 2022; Purnell,
       2022; Ritchie, 2023). Bringing in Marcuse’s conception of a ‘non-repressive society’
       moves us towards a ‘thick description’ of abolition democracy by showing how a dia-
       lectical method is crucial to abolitionist politics. Incipient and utopian possibilities
       within the now must be identified and worked on, revealing abolition democracy as
       both an overcoming and a working through contemporary capitalism and its carceral
       logics.                                               
         To begin with Marcuse’s rich philosophy of social life, he agrees with Freud that
       human society requires a base level of repression of natural instincts that are ulti-
       mately anti-social in their tendencies. Marcuse breaks with Freud however on the
       ‘possibility of a non-repressive civilization’, because for Marcuse ‘the very achieve-
       ments of repressive civilization seem to create the preconditions for the gradual abo-
       lition of repression’ (Marcuse, 2012, p. 5). Beyond the necessary repression for social
       cohesion, capitalism itself creates a form of ‘surplus repression’ that is necessary to
       mold people into proper capitalist subjects. Marcuse calls this channeling of instinc-
       tual desires towards what is best for capitalism the ‘performance principle’ (Marcuse,
       2012, p. 35). However, at a certain point in its development the surplus repression
       necessitated by capitalism is no longer necessary but is extraneous to the function-
       ing of capitalism itself; instead of moving beyond surplus repression, capitalist elites
       retain the ‘performance principle’ in order to maintain their control over society.

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 15 of 28 26  
                                                             
       For Marcuse, ‘if society cannot use its growing productivity for reducing repres-
       sion (because such usage would upset the hierarchy of the status quo), productivity
       must be turned against the individuals; it becomes itself an instrument of universal
       control’ (Marcuse, 2012, p. 93). This is one way Marcuse understood the growth of
       fascism in the 1930s, as ‘totalitarianism spreads over late industrial civilization wher-
       ever the interests of domination prevail upon productivity, arresting and diverting its
       potentialities’, and he saw such a possibility again in the American 1960’s under the
       guise of the ‘one-dimensional society’ that controls through culture what fascism
       required through force (Marcuse, 2012, p. 93). Yet Marcuse also saw in the growth of
       capitalism, and particularly in its technological advances that fundamentally change
       the nature of work and labor time, the possibility of both a more rational and freer
       society.                                              
         In addition to his analysis of surplus repression, Marcuse must also prove that the
       ‘hypothesis of a non-repressive civilization’ is true in order to avoid Freud’s pes-
       simism (Marcuse, 2012, p. 139). One answer he finds, that will prove fruitful for
       Davis, is in the arts and aesthetics. For Marcuse, ‘behind the aesthetic form lies the
       repressed harmony of sensuousness and reason--the eternal protest against the orga-
       nization of life by the logic of domination’ (Marcuse, 2012, p. 144). This is especially
       true as the decline in labor time points to the possibility of an aestheticization of
       everyday life that would reconcile the necessity of labor to the superfluousness of
       the arts. This is because ‘the emergence of a non-repressive reality principle would
       alter rather than destroy the social organization of labor: the liberation of Eros could
       create new and durable work relations’ (Marcuse, 2012, p. 155). Liberating ‘eros’
       as the aestheticization of everyday life allows Marcuse to imagine a non-repressive
       society based on material abundance, disalienated labor, and the valuing of play over
       instrumental rationality, for ‘only an order of abundance is compatible with freedom’
       (Marcuse, 2012, p. 194). From the ‘surplus repression’ of capitalism, its own produc-
       tive advances create the seeds for a future non-repressive society that would overturn
       the capitalist performance principle. Yet unclear here are the historical agents of this
       transformation and where it would come about; by the 1960s Marcuse did not see the
       traditional conception of the proletariat as willing to challenge capitalist repression,
       and the New Left and the Civil Rights Movement offered other potential historical
       actors to consider.                                   
         In surveying political forces in the late 1960s, Marcuse saw several different
       actors–traditional working-class, middle-class hippies, the Black Power movement
       and other decolonial movements globally–united in a refusal of the ‘performance
       principle’ of modern capitalism; ‘no matter how great the distance between the mid-
       dle-class revolt in the metropoles and the life and-death struggle of the wretched of
       the earth -- common to them is the depth of the Refusal’ (Marcuse, 1971, p. 6). Yet
       this is not a refusal of society in the simple sense of negation, but also an affirma-
       tive refusal– ‘the refusal with which the opposition confronts the existing society is
       affirmative in that it envisages a new culture which fulfills the humanistic promises
       betrayed by the old culture’--and therefore works on what is already positive within
       society (Marcuse, 1971, p. 7). This ‘new sensibility, which expresses the ascent of
       the life instincts over aggressiveness and guilt, would foster, on a social scale, the
       vital need for the abolition of injustice and misery’ (Marcuse, 1971, p. 23). Here

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 16 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       Marcuse is able to identify a diffuse set of actors who are both ready for and embrace
       his affirmative refusal of the capitalist ‘performance principle’ and the need for the
       abolition of capitalism. Marcuse ends these reflections with a call for a solidaristic
       economy of cooperation and an answer to the question of ‘what are the people in a
       free society going to do?’ (Marcuse, 1971, p. 91). Curiously he frames the answer as
       being ‘given by a young black girl’ who says ‘for the first time in our life, we shall
       be free to think about what we are going to do’ (Marcuse, 1971, p. 91). We could
       read Angela Davis as continuing this ‘young black girl’s’ answer by connecting the
       Marcusean project of a ‘non-repressive society’ to Davis’s embrace of a politics for
       a world without prisons.                              
         What is relevant in light of Davis’s intellectual connection to Marcuse is how his
       conception of a non-repressive society can be used to deepen our understanding of
       Davis’s abolition democracy. For Davis’s initial uses of ‘abolition’ conceptually in
       the 1970s draws heavily on Marcuse’s method of identifying concrete but utopian
       trends in the present for a dialectical overcoming of capitalism towards a communist
       future of abundance, security, and flourishing for all. Thinking with Marcuse sheds
       more light on Davis’s oft-quoted definition that abolition democracy is not only the
       ‘negative process of tearing down, but it is also about building up, about creating new
       institutions’ (Davis, 2005, p. 73). The creation of ‘new institutions’ is not ex nihilo
       but rooted in processes already occurring in the world. Davis gives credit to Marcuse
       for providing the means to theorize this dialectical process, as he ‘reveals the threads
       which lead directly from utopia to science and back to utopia again’ (Davis, 1998, p.
       179). These threads are processes that have certain utopian potentials in them to dia-
       lectically overcome the present, such as technological productivity in a Marcusean
       sense reconciling labor and necessity such that everyone’s needs will be satisfied.
       When Davis argues that radically meeting everyone’s needs will mean there is no
       crime for prisons to punish, I believe she has this Marcusean connection in mind of
       how the meeting of material needs will lead to the radical transformation of social
       relations. At times Davis even saw, like Marcuse, this utopian potential in the grow-
       ing productivity of capitalism and the decline in socially necessary labor, ideas that
       resonate with anti-work politics today as well (Davis, 2011, pp. 222-244; Weeks,
       2020).                                                
         Therefore, reading Davis with Marcuse highlights Davis’s Marxism as crucial to
       her conception of abolition, and that this is a Marxism filtered through the longer
       20th-century history of the Frankfurt school and its anti-fascist politics. For when
       Davis first proposed the abolition of prisons in the 1970s, it was with an emphasis on
       prisons as exemplars of the growing fascism of the U.S. carceral state. In her 1972
       essay ‘Political Prisoners, Prisons, and Black Liberation’, Davis adopted Marcuse’s
       idea that what was occurring in America was a ‘preventive fascism’ that focused
       political repression on the marginalized before they could coalesce into a real politi-
       cal challenge (Davis, 2016, p. 48). The growth of mass incarceration in this period
       was only the most overt form of this ‘preventive fascism’ that Marcuse also identified
       in the crushing of the student movement and the reactionary turn of the traditional
       working class. Similarly, Davis writes: ‘fascism is a process, its growth and develop-
       ment are cancerous in nature…one of the fundamental historical lessons to be learned
       from past failures to prevent the rise of fascism is the decisive and indispensable

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 17 of 28 26  
                                                             
       character of the fight against fascism in its incipient phases’ (Davis, 2016, p. 51).
       Davis’s ideas here point back to Marcuse’s earliest political writings of the 1930s
       that also emphasized the need to attack Nazism in its earliest stages (Marcuse, 1968,
       2004). Perhaps inspired by this, or just by Marcuse’s general argument that any left-
       ist politics had to be a truly democratic and mass politics, Davis posits a multi-racial
       democratic coalition to confront the incipient fascism. She writes, ‘it is only natural
       that blacks and other Third World peoples must lead this movement, for we are the
       first and most deeply injured victims of fascism. But it must embrace all potential
       victims and most important, all working-class people’ (Davis, 2016, 52). In seeking
       to build the largest possible radical democratic coalition against fascism—one that
       includes the conservative white-working class, anti-social ‘criminals’ and political
       prisoners—we may rightly hear an echo of Davis’s contemporary prison abolitionist
       work that abolition must leave no one behind (Davis et al, 2022).
         However, as I’ve argued, when it comes to introducing her prison abolitionist
       work since the 1990’s Davis leaves the Marcusean problematic of ‘preventive fas-
       cism’ behind. Yet in 2005’s Abolition Democracy there are still Marcusean echoes;
       for Marcuse the flipside of the problem of fascism was the problem of creating real
       democracy in America, a political program that Davis still uses abolition democracy
       to advocate for. Davis, writing in the context of George W. Bush’s militarism, uses
       prison abolition to ask ‘what kind of democracy do we currently inhabit?’ and her
       answer is the U.S. is a ‘flawed conception of democracy’ and what Marcuse would
       call a ‘pseudo-democracy’ (Davis, 2011, p. 46). Through military adventure abroad
       and capitalist commodification at home, ‘the notion of democracy has been fashioned
       into something like a commodity that can be exported, sold to, or imposed upon
       entire populations’ (Davis, 2011, p. 84). Davis wants here to ‘urge people to think
       about different versions of democracy, future democracies, democracies grounded in
       socialism’ (Davis, 2011, p. 47), yet absent here is the Marcusean dialectic of grounded
       utopianism, the search for processes within the U.S.’s ‘flawed democracy’ that point
       to new possibilities. Davis seems to raise the notion of utopianism one more time in
       Are Prisons Obsolete?, recognizing that ‘prison abolitionists are dismissed as utopi-
       ans and idealists whose ideas are at best unrealistic and impracticable’ (Davis, 2003,
       p. 10). We could read Davis’s rejection of this unrealistic and impractical utopianism
       as her attempt to replace it with the version of utopianism as dialectical method that
       Davis found in Marcuse.                               
         In another oft-repeated statement, Davis argues that abolitionist politics must ‘not
       rest only on the prison system as an isolated institution but must also be directed at
       all the social relations that support the permanence of the prison’ (Davis, 2003, p.
       112). These total ‘social relations’ are what Marcuse called in different ways ‘pre-
       ventive fascism’, the ‘one-dimensional society’, and the opposite of his goal of a
       ‘non-repressive society’. In challenging the centrality of the prison to modern social
       life, Davis’s conception of abolition democracy may also be fleshed out by Marcuse’s
       non-repressive society. In both abolition democracy and non-repressive society, what
       is called for is the abolition of racial capitalism, the transformation of productive
       labor, and a society based on superfluous play rather than instrumentalized necessity.
       Such total transformation–the creation of abolition democracy--is the only true coun-
       ter to fascism that both Marcuse and Davis recognize. 

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 18 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
         In reference to the first Critical Resistance conference in Berkeley, CA in 1998
       Davis claims that ‘if Marcuse were alive and well today, no doubt he would have
       been a key figure in this conference’ (Davis, 2004, p. xii). Davis’s explicit reason
       is that the conference’s goal to ‘construct unpredictable conversations across those
       disciplinary divides’ reflected Marcuse’s own bridging of theory and practice across
       both academic and activist communities (Davis 2004, p. xii). In this contribution, I
       have argued that beyond his bridging of theory and practice, Marcuse’s ideas–partic-
       ularly of the abolition of capitalism as the creation of a non-repressive society–are a
       key influence on Davis’s own formulation of prison abolition as abolition democracy.
       It is not surprising that Marcuse’s influence is rarely seen as important to her work;
       Davis herself always positions her prison abolition work within the long Black Radi-
       cal Tradition, and prison abolition itself as wrestling with the afterlives of slavery and
       the failures of Reconstruction. Yet Davis’s intellectual training was not in the activ-
       ism of the civil rights movement but in German Idealism and Germany’s own New
       Left student movement (Thompson, 2022; James, 2024, pp. 83-98). Before becoming
       an icon of Black Power she was the student of the Philosopher of the New Left. By
       situating Davis as not simply Marcuse’s former student but as in some way herself
       Marcusean, what we find is a more fleshed out vision of Davis’s abolition democracy
       and its relevance to anti-fascist politics today.     
         In emphasizing how Marcuse’s idea of a ‘non-repressive society’ can deepen our
       understanding of Davis’s abolition democracy, I have often highlighted key differ-
       ences of emphasis and focus between them as teacher and student. Yet ultimately
       both are also members of the critical theory tradition to forge philosophy as a tool
       for liberation against all forms of tyranny. For both Marcuse and Davis, their theo-
       rizing on abolition emerged not only at moments of capitalist crisis, but in moments
       where that crisis particularly translated itself through the rise of fascism. Both saw
       the need to fight fascism through a mass democratic politics that could both solve
       the problems of material needs and release new, life-affirming drives into a world of
       abstract capitalist rationality. Neither of them gave up on the possibility of utopian
       changes that emerge from everyday resistance and coalesce into mass struggles for
       social revolution. At their best, both Marcuse’s and Davis’s ‘great refusal’ continues
       this challenge to our increasingly fascist future in the name of utopias already present
       within the contemporary condition.                    
                                              Quinn Lester   
       An abolitionism worthy of the name must target the nation-state
       Abolition is a collective practice of productive refusal, of affirmative negation. It is
       an immoderate rejection of white supremacy, patriarchy, hetero-normativity, ableism,
       settler-colonialism, border imperialism, political hierarchy, and the rule of capital.
       Abolition is an open-ended and ongoing project that takes intolerable objects, insti-
       tutions, and dynamics of domination (the prison, the police, slavery, capitalism, the
       law, the state etc.) and works to make them obsolete. Through building alternative
       forms of sociality and accountability, abolitionist projects target the conditions of
       possibility for these intolerable institutions and dynamics to render them impossible.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 19 of 28 26  
                                                             
       In doing so, they move us closer to freedom as an ongoing practice. Abolition is a
       politics of constant reflection, continuous analysis, and commitment to care, always
       willing to face discomfort. Abolition prefigures new worlds.
         To better understand the simultaneously negative and positive work of abolition,
       we turn to a durable conglomeration of forces that is often taken for granted by politi-
       cal theory, political philosophy, and political analyses in general: the nation-state and
       in particular, the settler-colonial nation-state. While we believe that our argument
       extends to all modern state forms and statist logics, we are primarily interested in
       those nation-states that claim a single sovereignty over a territorially bounded space,
       over land. The nation-state form always rejects, by definition, the material and lived
       reality of overlapping sovereignties, nations, and ways of life that co-exist on and
       with the land. Following Mariame Kaba, Glen Coulthard, and Leanne Betasamosake
       Simpson and Robyn Maynard, we insist that abolitionists must grapple with and seek
       to abolish the nation-state if we are to have an abolitionism worthy of the name. To
       demonstrate this, we look at the work of abolition, anarchism, and decolonization in,
       to use the words of Leanne Betasamosake Simpson, ‘constellation’ with each other.
       The most promising abolitionist visions are decolonial in that they target the nation-
       state form as incommensurable with freedom and self-determination.
         To think abolition, we turn to Mariame Kaba as one of our guides (Kaba, 2021;
       Kaba and Hayes, 2023; Kaba and Ritchie, 2022). We take up a moment in her body
       of work where she constellates an anarchist critique of the nation-state with the work
       of abolitionism (Kaba, 2018). In her forward to As Black as Resistance Kaba writes:
         As an abolitionist, the Black anarchism espoused by [William C.] Anderson and
         [Zoé] Samudzi resonates with me. Abolishing the prison industrial complex
         (PIC) is not just about ending prisons but also about creating an alternative
         system of governance that is not based on domination, hierarchy, and control.
         In that respect, abolitionism and anarchism are positive rather than negative
         projects. They do not signal the absence of prisons or governments but the cre-
         ation of different forms of sociality, governance, and accountability that are not
         statist and carceral (Kaba, 2018, pp. xvii–xviii).  
       An essential part of Samudzi and Anderson’s project is to draw attention to the deep
       and non-accidental connections between black liberation projects and decoloniza-
       tion. At the core of this project is the quality and kinds of relations that people and
       communities have with land. This connection is crucial for Kaba, both genealogically
       and theoretically. Kaba continues:                    
         … this work echoes the practices of anarcha-indigenism that differentiate inclu-
         sive models of indigenous nationhood based on inclusivity, horizontality, and
         interrelatedness from nation-states based on borders, exclusivity, domination,
         and control (Kaba, 2018, p. xviii).                 
       Here, we read Kaba as identifying practices constitutive of the nation-state form:
       domination, hierarchization, control, and exclusion. Moreover, we read her as offer-
       ing the counter-practices of sociality, governance, and accountability readily found
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 20 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       in the Black anarchist tradition, in Indigenous theorizations of nationhood, and in
       abolitionism: inclusion, horizontalization, and interrelation. Kaba rejects a carica-
       tured understanding of anarchism as the mere lack of something (e.g. a lack of order)
       and instead offers affirmative practices which, through their rehearsal, counter statist
       practices. By highlighting the connections between abolitionist, decolonial, and anar-
       chist thought, Kaba identifies points of connection, overlap, and solidarity in diverse
       movements.                                            
         We use ‘affirmative negation’ to name the forces of abolition, anarchism, and
       decolonization that refuse intolerable institutions and practices while also affirming
       values that make those intolerable things no longer feel necessary. Affirmative nega-
       tions do more than simply oppose. For instance, while exclusivity and inclusivity may
       appear to be opposites, Kaba shows that something more complicated is happening.
       Inclusion can involve not merely an expansion of borders but an affirmative negation
       of the idea that borders are necessary. Inclusion obviates a constitutive feature of
       exclusion: the belief that politics requires ranking differences and policing belonging.
       Inclusivity requires adaptation, growth, and an openness to modes of difference that
       are unfamiliar, those that may feel strange, impossible, or maladapted. Likewise, for
       Kaba, horizontality is not merely the rejection of hierarchy; it is an affirmative nega-
       tion of domination, or the organization of power over another. Horizontality must be
       actively produced and maintained through processes of discernment and collective
       decision making.                                      
         Similarly, inter-relatedness is not merely the opposite of atomistic isolation; it is
       an affirmative negation of control. Inter-relatedness blocks a constitutive feature of
       control: the non-relational relation of determining what others do and what is pos-
       sible for them. Meaningful interrelations require modes of ongoing treaty-making,
       responsiveness, reciprocity, and respect (Barker, 2019; Kimmerer, 2015; Simpson,
       2017).                                                
         Kaba reminds us that domination is not natural, automatic, or necessary; rather,
       it requires constant (re)production and maintenance, including the liberal use of vio-
       lence. That such practices may appear common-sensical or necessary is the product
       of centuries of effort to naturalize the nation-state as the hegemonic form of political
       life. Because of our collective and individual subjectivation to these modes of life,
       abolition must be enacted prefiguratively in its daily practice, to engage in affirma-
       tive negation to build alternate modes of sociality, governance, and accountability.
       Prefiguration names practices that enact the political commitments that we seek to
       bring into existence. Abolitionist, anarchist, and decolonial theorists have long turned
       to prefigurative practices as essential to their projects because how we live with each
       other determines the horizons of our possibilities. The prefigurations of those who
       have come before us mean that there have always been other ways.
         One of the richest sites for considering prefigurative alternatives to domination
       is in Leanne Betasamosake Simpson and Robyn Maynard’s exchange of letters in
       Rehearsals for Living (Maynard and Simpson, 2022). There, Maynard and Simp-
       son identify vital points of connection between the projects of abolition and decolo-
       nization. They emphasize these movements’ shared orientation to overcoming the
       (re)production of the nation-state through practices that reach beyond the horizons
       of possibility currently legitimated. Maynard writes to Simpson that, ‘Abolition is

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 21 of 28 26  
                                                             
       imagination work, anti-colonial struggle is imagination work, conjure work, science
       fiction in real time. It is daring to see that the world now did not need to be as it was,
       does not need to be as it is, and certainly, most importantly, need not—will not—
       remain this way’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 176). Maynard highlights how
       abolition and decolonization recognize that we do not live in the world that we want
       to live in, so we must look beyond existing material conditions. The existing material
       conditions are the problem, so we must imagine life lived differently and rehearse it
       in prefigurative practices. We must cultivate and prefigure practices of imagining so
       that possibilities that were foreclosed can become possibilities anew. Imagination can
       resist naturalization and reification; imagination has no end.
         Maynard points specifically to the nation-state as a pervasive and untenable for-
       mation of the current material conditions that constrains the imagination. Drawing
       from the black radical tradition, she states, ‘The nation-state, wherever we find it, is
       a problem: Black people are still living and dying from the vestiges of colonially-
       imposed states and the carceral mechanisms installed to support them’ (Maynard and
       Simpson, 2022, p. 165). Prison and police abolitionists have long pointed to carceral
       mechanisms as their primary target, and Maynard rightly locates the origins of these
       mechanisms in the colonial project of nation-state building (Maynard and Simp-
       son, 2022, p. 165). This colonial project, Maynard recognizes, offers only a choice
       between ‘violent exclusion from, or genocidal inclusion into, the nation-state’ (May-
       nard and Simpson, 2022, 156). The nation-state form itself, she argues, ‘requires vio-
       lence against Indigenous women, as part of the dispossession of the land’ (Maynard
       and Simpson, 2022, p. 173). Once recognized as the primary bulwark against Black,
       Brown, and Indigenous freedom, the nation-state ceases to set the terms for imagin-
       ing freedom. In contrast, Maynard insists, ‘I want to belong otherwise on altogether
       different terms’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 173). Simpson works from the other
       direction, showing how prisons, surveillance, and policing structure and maintain
       colonial projects. While Simpson makes passing references to abolitionist resistances
       to carceral forms in her earlier book As We Have Always Done, in Rehearsals she
       describes specific ways that abolitionist politics are related to decolonial projects.
       Pointing to demands made by radical black feminist pragmatists (Woodly, 2022)
       organizing with Black Lives Matter Toronto, Simpson notes that:
         Every single demand will make the lives of Indigenous peoples in Toronto and
         beyond better. Every single demand towards defunding the police could save
         the lives of Indigenous Two-Spirit and queer people. Every single demand
         addresses the issue of MMIWG [missing and murdered Indigenous women and
         girls], and represents movement towards abolition. This platform does more
         in my mind to regenerate Indigenous communities and mitigate the trauma of
         colonialism than reconciliation or any state offering (Maynard and Simpson
         2022, 196).                                         
       Moreover, Simpson also draws connections between state responses to decoloniza-
       tion and other forms of protest like the BLM movement: ‘Seeing the chief of police
       take a knee at the protest reminded me of every single part of reconciliation’ (May-
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 22 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       nard and Simpson, 2022, p. 230). Thus, she identifies how the colonial nation-state
       tries to incorporate what it cannot manage through violent repression.
         Citing Saidiya Hartman, Simpson notes that abolitionism may ‘deal with a large
       chunk of practical social issues and issues of inequality stemming from colonialism’,
       but it does not ‘necessarily deal with what my people usually mobilize over—land
       and self-determination’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 197). In identifying this
       tendency, Simpson calls us to see that abolitionist projects that do not also attack the
       settler-nation-state’s focus on the control of land and the denial of self-determination
       will ultimately fail to end prisons and police. Abolitionist projects that do not con-
       front the nation-state will maintain the violent modes of world building that neces-
       sitate prisons and police.                            
         Perhaps Simpson’s most important intervention on this point is that she critiques
       the mechanisms of the nation-state based on what they do to relationships, and par-
       ticularly relationships to the land. Maynard agrees. As she points out—bluntly, sim-
       ply, and repeatedly—land matters to settlers and to the possibility of their projects.
       Quoting the Senegalese novelist and filmmaker, Ousmane Sembène, Maynard writes:
       ‘Everything they do is to destroy the land’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 204).
       She echoes this line as a refrain throughout the entire letter (Maynard and Simpson,
       2022, pp. 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 211, 215). It becomes a motif that is a statement
       of fact, and a reflection of the centrality of land to the settler project, emphasizing the
       destructive force of settling. Maynard continues:     
         In addition to the role of policing in enforcing Black people’s unfreedom …
         policing has always served, and serves, still, to sever Indigenous peoples from
         their lands, from non-capitalist ways of relating to land and to all other non-
         human relations. That policing functions in service of those who destroy the
         land. That one opposite of policing is Land Back, which is, after all, an end to
         the imposition of private property regimes and the carceral technologies devel-
         oped to enforce them (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 204).
       Alternatives to destroying the land are alive and well. ‘What I learn from the way
       my ancestors lived life collectively’, Simpson writes, ‘is that if you build systems
       based on relationality, reciprocity, consent and diversity, if you refuse hierarchy and
       authoritarian power in both collective and intimate settings, if “laws” are practices
       embodied in deep relationality rather than rigid authoritarian rules, if “justice” repairs
       and restores and if your practice of living is also a practice of consent, you elimi-
       nate policing’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 181). Thus, she argues, abolition and
       decolonization can and must become a ‘linked formation’ even as they ‘come from
       different experiences and histories with genocide’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, pp.
       198–199). Simpson emphasizes the power of linking these struggles, how together
       they can strengthen the flight paths from the nation-state (Maynard and Simpson,
       2022, p. 199). ‘What if’, Simpson asks, ‘we did this work together, instead of beg-
       ging the state?’ (Maynard and Simpson, 2022, p. 195). The nation-state cannot be
       on the side of liberation when it has been constituted through the mechanisms of
       anti-blackness, colonization, capitalism, and hetero-patriarchy. Nation-states occupy
       land. By contrast, abolition and decolonization can build worlds with and in the con-
                                                             

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 23 of 28 26  
                                                             
       text of the land. And this contrast, Simpson notes, is part of what Indigenous peoples
       have always done:                                     
         For centuries, Indigenous peoples have built societies in formations that are
         anti-state, with a social contract that isn’t a contract at all but an ecology of
         caretaking. Nations-states were built on top of us, using our bodies, minds,
         spirits and land as resources and materials, or as threats to state sovereignty that
         were targeted for elimination. Our relationality was considered extractable and
         disposable. At the same time, since the arrival of the white man, we have also
         engaged in anarchistic resistances, without necessarily laying claim to anar-
         chism as a politics (Simpson, 2025, p. 118).        
                                                             
       This shifting of the conversation away from the logic of the nation-state has been
       facilitated by the brilliant work of Glen Coulthard. Coulthard offers meaningful alter-
       natives to the nation-state drawn from a material analysis of Dene governance and
       Indigenous world building more generally. Coulthard shows how these alternatives
       do not replace the nation-state or its functions but rather undermine the naturaliza-
       tion of the nation-state itself. They resist logics of replacement or simple opposition,
       showing instead through affirmative negation that the nation-state form is already
       obsolete. Coulthard calls these alternatives prefigurative, observing: ‘we enact or
       practice our political commitments to Indigenous national and women’s liberation in
       the cultural form and content of our struggle itself’ (Coulthard, 2014, p. 159). In his
       insistence that one cannot decolonize through colonial methods, Coulthard alerts us
       to the need for continual consideration of the how of what we do, here focusing on the
       way colonial gender systems have shaped struggles for liberation. This attunement to
       prefiguration within movements entails not purity or perfection but rather a meaning-
       ful grappling with the present conditions to resist and refuse them as much as one is
       able by living otherwise now with others for the sake of the future and for the sake
       of this moment. This prefiguration in Indigenous work is part of what Indigenous
       theorists have called radical resurgence, allowing us to see how worlds attacked by
       settler regimes and logics have been maintained through struggle and care and offer
       us ways forward now (Coulthard, 2014; Simpson, 2017). 
         Coulthard’s analysis of the colonial nation-state speaks directly to broader diffi-
       culties in theorizing how abolitionists ought to engage with the existing nation-state
       given the ‘sheer magnitude of discursive and nondiscursive power we find ourselves
       up against in our struggles’. Coulthard argues that, ‘In our efforts to interpolate the
       legal and political discourses of the state to secure recognition of our rights to land
       and self-determination we have too often found ourselves interpellated as subjects of
       settler-colonial rule’ (Coulthard, 2014, p. 179). Coulthard is particularly attuned to
       how state recognition operates as a trap by insisting that colonized peoples must work
       within the state to have their claims heard. Yet, it is the nation-state that makes the
       claims illegible, illegitimate, sometimes illegal, and necessary for survival as peoples
       in the first place. These difficulties mean that, as Coulthard continues, it is a false
       choice to ‘vacate the field of state negotiations and participation entirely’ for self-
       determination (Coulthard, 2014, p. 179). All the more important, then, is the work of
                                                             

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 24 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
                                                             
       practically and theoretically questioning, decentering, and showing the obsolescence
       of the nation-state. Or as Simpson puts it more recently:
         This entanglement with the state, while it may be necessary for us as a prac-
         tice of survival, imagines state formations as the ideal vessel, and therefore
         limits our visions of the future, limits how we see our own formations, our
         nation-hoods and our collective arrangements in, or around, the nation-state…
         it benefits the state and our oppressors for us to remain invested in the story of
         reforming the state rather than abolishing it (Simpson, 2025, p. 118).
                                                             
       We observe a constellation between Coulthard’s project and those of Kaba, Maynard,
       and Simpson. These thinkers, sometimes together and in direct conversation with one
       another, describe alternative modes of sociality, governance, and accountability with-
       out assuming that the nation-state is necessary or legitimate. Across these theoretical
       examples, we see important anarchist tendencies, opportunities to break the attach-
       ments felt by those of us who have been disciplined into assuming the nation-state as
       inevitable for politics, that is, for sociality, governance, and accountability. In their
       movements and connections, decolonization, abolition, and anarchism—exemplified
       in the work of Maynard and Simpson, in that of Coulthard, and in the invocation of
       Kaba—provide pragmatic political agendas for resistance to interpellation as nation-
       state subjects. Abolitionists and anarchists can cultivate forms of sociality, gover-
       nance, and accountability both against and outside the domain of colonial nation-state
       power, building towards a liberatory politics of collective self-determination.
                                    Sarah Tyson and Andrew Dilts
       Declarations                                          
       Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
       the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
       NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution
       and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
       and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed
       material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article
       or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
       Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
       the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
       exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view
       a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 /.
       References                                            
       Akbar, A. A. (2020). An abolitionist horizon for (police) reform. California Law Review, 108(6),
         1781–1846.                                          
       Alexander, M. (2010). The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness. The New
         Press.                                              
       Allen, A. (2007) Justice and reconciliation: The death of the prison? Human Studies 30(4): 311–321.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 25 of 28 26  
       Allen, A. (2016). The end of progress: Decolonizing the normative foundations of critical theory. Colum-
         bia University Press.                               
       Allen, E. (2024). ‘Jail and Prison Populations Have Decreased Since 2019—but Continued….’ Vera Insti-
         tute of Justice, November 12. h t t p s : / / w w w . v e r a . o r g / n e w s / j a i l - a n d - p r i s o n - p o p u l a t i o n s - h a v e - d e c r e a s e
         d - s i n c e - 2 0 1 9 - b u t - c o n t i n u e d - p r o g r e s s - i s n t - p r o m i s e d /.
       Attica Liberation Faction. (2011). The Attica liberation faction manifesto of demands and anti-depression
         platform. Race & Class, 53(2), 28–35.               
       Baldwin, J. (1963). Interview with Florida Forum, Miami. h t t p s : / / w w w . y o u t u b e . c o m / w a t c h ? v = k M p O g L
         S X A a Y / .                                       
       Bambara, T.C. (2023). Toni Cade Bambara. In Claudia Tate (Ed.), Black Women Writers at Work., ed.
         Claudia Tate. Chicago: Haymarket Books.             
       Barker, J. (2019) Confluence: Water as an analytic of Indigenous feminisms. American Indian Culture and
         Research Journal 43(3): 1–40.                       
       Bergen, C.W. and Bressler, M.S. (2016) “Ban the box” gives ex-offenders a fresh start in securing employ-
         ment. Labor Law Journal 67(2): 383–395.             
       Berman, D. A. (2010). Turning hope-and-change talk into clemency action for nonviolent drug offenders.
         New England Journal on Criminal and Civil Confinement, 36(1), 59–74.
       Black Youth Project. (2014). Agenda to Keep Us Safe. The Black Youth Project. h t t p s : / / b l a c k y o u t h p r o j e c
         t . c o m / b y p 1 0 0 - r e l e a s e s - t h e - a g e n d a - t o - k e e p - u s - s a f e - t o - m o b i l i z e - y o u n g - a c t i v i s t s - s e e k i n g - t o - h o l d - p o l
         i c e - a c c o u n t a b l e /.                    
       Brich, C. (2008). The Groupe d’Information sur les prisons: The voice of prisoners? Or Foucault’s? Fou-
         cault Studies, 5, 26–47.                            
       Bryant, E. (2025). What Does “Due Process” Mean for Immigrants and Why Is It Important?. Vera Insti-
         tute of Justice, June 4. h t t p s : / / w w w . v e r a . o r g / n e w s / w h a t - d o e s - d u e - p r o c e s s - m e a n - f o r - i m m i g r a n t s - a n
         d - w h y - i s - i t - i m p o r t a n t /.        
       Burton, O. (2023). Tip of the spear: Black radicalism, prison repression, and the long Attica revolt. Uni-
         versity of California Press.                        
       Carens, J. (2008) The rights of irregular migrants. Ethics & International Affairs 22(2): 163–186.
       Center, S. (2021). Unsung: Unheralded Narratives of American Slavery & Abolition. Penguin Group.
       Chinosole, ed. (1996). Schooling the Generations in the Politics of Prison. Berkeley, CA: New Earth.
       Coulthard, G. (2014). Red Skin, White Masks: Rejecting the Colonial Politics of Recognition. Indigenous
         Americas. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
       Davies, E. J. (2025). Dear political science: Tools for the study of Black (Life and) Politics. Politics,
         Groups, and Identities. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 2 1 5 6 5 5 0 3 . 2 0 2 4 . 2 4 4 4 9 1 0
       Davis, A. Y. (1971). Reflections on the Black Woman’s role in the community of slaves. The Black Scholar,
         3(4), 2–15.                                         
       Davis, A. Y. (2003). Are Prisons Obsolete? Seven Stories Press.
       Davis, A. Y. (2005). Abolition democracy: beyond empire, prisons, and torture. Seven Stories Press.
       Davis, A. Y. (2011). Women, race, & class. Vintage.   
       Davis, A. Y., & Rodriguez, D. (2000). The challenge of prison abolition: A conversation. Social Justice,
         27(3), 212–218.                                     
       Davis, A. Y., Funke, P., Wolfson, T., & Lamas, A. (2017). The great refusal: herbert marcuse and contem-
         porary social movements. Temple University Press.   
       Davis, A. Y., Dent, G., Meiners, E. R., & Richie, B. (2022). Abolition. Feminism. Now. Vol. 2. Haymarket.
       Davis, A. Y. (1998). Women and Capitalism: Dialectics of Oppression and Liberation. In J. James (Ed.),
         The Angela Y. Davis Reader (pp. 161–192). Wiley-Blackwell.
       Davis, A. Y. (2004). Marcuse’s Legacies. H. Marcuse, The New Left and the 1960s: Collected Papers of
         Herbert Marcuse (Vol. 3, pp. vii–xiv). Routledge.   
       Davis, A. Y. (2016). Political prisoners, prisons, and black liberation. In If They Come in the Morning.
         Voices of Resistance. New York: Verso.              
       Death Penalty Information Center. (2025). State Campaigns to End Extreme Sentences. The Sentencing
         Project. h t t p s : / / w w w . s e n t e n c i n g p r o j e c t . o r g / s e n t e n c i n g - r e f o r m - s t a t e - c a m p a i g n s /.
       Defert, D. (2021). The Emergence of a New Front: The Prisons. In K. Thompson & P. Zurn (Eds.), Intoler-
         able: Writings from Michel Foucault and the Prisons Information Group (1970–1980) (pp. 35–48).
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
       Dilts, A. (2014). Punishment and inclusion: Race, membership, and the limits of American liberalism.
         Fordham University Press.                           

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 26 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
       Dilts, A. (2019). Crisis, Critique, And Abolition. In B. Harcourt & D. Fassin (Eds.), A Time for Critique
         (pp. 230–251). Columbia University Press.           
       Dilts, A. (2021). Carceral Enjoyments & Killjoying the Social Life of Social Death. In C. Taylor & K.
         Struthers Montford (Eds.), Building Abolition: Decarceration and Social Justice (pp. 196–223).
         Routledge.                                          
       Dumitru, O. (2023). What do Americans think about the U.S. prison system? YouGov.
       Farr, A. L. (2017). Critical Theory: Adorno, Marcuse, and Angela Davis. The Routledge Companion to
         Philosophy of Race (pp. 102–112). Routledge.        
       Ferguson, L. (2024). Rethinking Marcuse’s Legacy for Abolitionist Politics. The Marcusean Mind.
         Routledge.                                          
       Foucault, M. (2021). I Perceive the Intolerable. In K. Thompson & P. Zurn (Eds.), Intolerable: Writings
         from Michel Foucault and the Prisons Information Group (1970–1980) (pp. 75–78). University of
         Minnesota Press.                                    
       Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison, trans. A. Sheridan. New York: Vintage
         Random House.                                       
       Franklin, J. H., & Schweninger, L. (2000). Runaway Slaves: Rebels on the Plantation. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Frye, M. (1983). On Being White: Thinking Toward a Feminist Understanding of Race and Race Suprem-
         acy. In M. Frye (Ed.),                              
       Gilmore, K. (2000) Slavery and prison — Understanding the connections. Social Justice 27(3): 195–205.
       Gilmore, R. W. (2007). Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in Globalizing California.
         University of California Press.                     
       Gilmore, R. W., Tippett K. (2023). On Being. h t t p s : / / o n b e i n g . o r g / p r o g r a m s / r u t h - w i l s o n - g i l m o r e - w h e r e - l i
         f e - i s - p r e c i o u s - l i f e - i s - p r e c i o u s /.
       Gottschalk, M. (2016) Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics. Princeton Uni-
         versity Press.                                      
       Groupe d’information sur les prisons (GIP). (2021a). Back cover of Intolerable 1. In K. Thompson & P.
         Zurn (Eds.), Intolerable: Writings from Michel Foucault and the Prisons Information Group (1970–
         1980) (pp. 93–94). University of Minnesota Press.   
       Groupe d’information sur les prisons (GIP). (2021b). On prisons. In K. Thompson & P. Zurn (Eds.), Intol-
         erable: Writings from Michel Foucault and the Prisons Information Group (1970–1980) (pp. 66–67).
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
       Guenther, L. (2013). Solitary confinement: Social death and its afterlives. University of Minnesota Press.
       Guenther, L., & Zeman, S. (2015). Death and other Penalties: Philosophy in a Time of Mass Incarcera-
         tion. Fordham University Press.                     
       Gumbs, A. P. (2024). Survival is a Promise: The Eternal Life of Audre Lorde. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
       Hartman, S. (2016). The belly of the world: A note on Black women’s labors. Souls, 18(1), 166–173.
       Hebrews 11:1. The Bible. King James Version. Bible Gateway. h t t p s : / / w w w . b i b l e g a t e w a y . c o m / p a s s a g e / ? s
         e a r c h = H e b r e w s % 2 0 1 1 % 3 A 1 & v e r s i o n = K J V /.
       Hesse, B. (2017). White sovereignty (…), Black life politics: “The N****r They Couldn’t Kill.” South
         Atlantic Quarterly, 116(3), 581–604.                
       Heuman, G., & Burnard, T. (2010). The routledge history of slavery. Routledge.
       Hooker, J. (2016) Black Lives Matter and the paradoxes of U.S. Black politics: From Democratic sacrifice
         to Democratic repair. Political Theory 44(4): 448–469.
       Hope, J. K., & Mullen, B. (2023). The black antifascist tradition: fighting back from anti-lynching to
         abolition. Haymarket Books.                         
       Hulsman, L. (1986). Critical criminology and the concept of crime. Contemporary Crises, 10(1986),
         63–80.                                              
       Jackson, G. (1972). Blood in my Eye. Random House.    
       Jackson, J. M. (2019). Race, Risks, and Responses: Mapping Black Americansʼ Reactions to Policing in
         the US. PhD dissertation, University of Chicago. Accessed at h t t p s : / / k no w l e d g e . u c h i c a g o . e d u / r e c o
         r d / 1 8 3 9 / .                                   
       James, J. (ed.) (2003) Imprisoned intellectuals: America’s political prisoners write on life, liberation, and
         rebellion. Rowman & Littlefield.                    
       James, J. (2004). American “prison notebooks.” Race & Class, 45(3), 35–47.
       James, J. (Ed.). (2005). The new abolitionists: (Neo)slave narratives and contemporary prison writings.
         SUNY Press.                                         
       James, J. (2024). Contextualizing angela davis: the agency and identity of an icon. Bloomsbury.

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Prison abolition                    Page 27 of 28 26  
       Kaba, M. (2021). We do this ‘til we free us: abolitionist organizing and transforming justice. Haymarket
         Press.                                              
       Kaba, M., & Hayes, K. (2023). Let this radicalize you: organizing and the revolution of reciprocal care.
         Haymarket Books.                                    
       Kaba, M., Heyes, K. (2025). We must burst our algorithmic bubbles and build together across difference.
         Movement Memos, March 20, 2025. h t t p s : / / t r u t h o u t . o r g / a u d i o / w e - m u s t - b u r s t - o u r - a l g o r i t h m i c - b u b b l
         e s - a n d - b u i l d - t o g e t h e r - a c r o s s - d i ff e r e n c e / ? r e f = o r g a n i z i n g m y t h o u g h t s . o r g /.
       Kaba, M., Ritchie, A. J. (2022). No More Police: A Case for Abolition. New York; London: The New Press.
       Kaba, M. (2018). Foreword. In W. C. Anderson & Z. Samudzi, As Black as Resistance: Finding the Condi-
         tions for Liberation (pp. xiii–xviii). AK Press.    
       Kaba, M. (2020). Yes, We Mean Literally Abolish the Police. The New York Times. h t t p s : / / w w w . n y t i m e s .
         c o m / 2 0 2 0 / 0 6 / 1 2 / o p i n i o n / s u n d a y / fl o y d - a b o l i s h - d e f u n d - p o l i c e . h t m l /.
       Kim, A., Meiners, E., Petty, J., Petty, A., Richie, B. and Ross, S. (eds.) (2018) The Long Term: Resisting
         Life Sentences Working Toward Freedom. Haymarket.   
       Kimmerer, R. W. (2015). Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge and the Teach-
         ings of Plants. Milkweed Editions.                  
       Konig, D. T. (2006). The long road to Dred Scott: Personhood and the rule of law in the trial court records
         of St. Louis slave freedom suits. UMKC Law Review, 75(1), 53–80.
       Konya, N., Scott, V. Forthcoming. Abolitionist praxis and pragmatism: lessons from maine. In A. Zamalin,
         M. Burkey (Eds.) Movements and American Political Thought. SUNY Press.
       Leeb, C., Nichols, R., Winter, Y., & Allen, A. (2018). Liberating critical theory: Eurocentrism, normativity,
         and capitalism: Symposium on Amy Allen’s the end of progress: Decolonizing the normative founda-
         tions of critical theory, Columbia university press, 2016. Political Theory, 46(5), 772–800.
       Lester, Q. (2021). Whose democracy in which state?: Abolition democracy from Angela Davis to WEB Du
         Bois. Social Science Quarterly, 102(7), 3081–3086.  
       Marcuse, H. (1968) The Struggle against Liberalism in the Totalitarian View of the State. Negations:
         Essays in Critical Theory. Beacon Press, pp. 3–42.  
       Marcuse, H. (1971). An Essay on Liberation. Beacon Press.
       Marcuse, H. (2004). Technology, war and fascism: Collected papers of Herbert Marcuse (Vol. 1).
         Routledge.                                          
       Marcuse, H. (2012). Eros and Civilization: A Philosophical Inquiry into Freud. Routledge.
       Maynard, R., & Betasamosake Simpson, L. (2022). Rehearsals for Living. Haymarket Books.
       Medina, J. (2017). Varieties of Hermeneutical Injustice. In I. J. Kidd, J. Medina, & G. Pohlhaus (Eds.), The
         Routledge Handbook of Epistemic Injustice (pp. 41–52). Routledge.
       Meiners, E. R. (2007). Right to be Hostile: Schools, Prisons, and the Making of Public Enemies. Routledge.
       Mills, C. (1997). The Racial Contract. Cornell University Press.
       Movement for Black Lives. (2016). A Vision for Black Lives. https://m4bl.org/policy-platforms/.
       O’Carroll, F. (2017). Inherently governmental: A legal argument for ending private federal prisons and
         detention centers. Emory Law Journal, 67(2), 293–335.
       Patterson, O. (1982). Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Harvard University Press.
       Pohlhaus, J., G. (2012) Relational knowing and epistemic injustice: Toward a theory of willful hermeneuti-
         cal ignorance. Hypatia 27(4): 715–735.              
       Prison Policy Initiative. (2025). New ICE Arrest Data Show the Power of State and Local Governments to
         Curtail Mass Deportations. h t t p s : / / w w w . p r i s o n p o l i c y . o r g / b l o g / 2 0 2 5 / 1 2 / 1 1 / i c e - j a i l s - u p d a t e /.
       Prison Policy Initiative. n.d. Racial Justice. h t t p s : / / w w w . p r i s o n p o l i c y . o r g / r a c i a l j u s t i c e . h t m l /.
       Purnell, D. (2022). Becoming Abolitionists: Police, Protests, and the Pursuit of Freedom. Astra Publishing
         House.                                              
       Ransby, B. (2018). Making all Black Lives Matter: Reimagining freedom in the Twenty-First Century.
         University of California Press.                     
       Richie, B. (2012). Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison Nation. NYU Press.
       Ritchie, A. (2023). Practicing New Worlds: Abolition and Emergent Strategies. Vol. 9. AK Press.
       Rodríguez, D. (2006). Forced Passages: Imprisoned Radical Intellectuals and the U.S. Prison Regime.
         University of Minnesota Press.                      
       Schweninger, L. (2018). Appealing for Liberty: Freedom Suits in the South. Oxford University Press.
       Sebastian, C. (2024) Angela Davis and critical theory, from Kant to abolition. Polity 56(2): 207–229.
       Shabazz, R. (2024). Angela Y. Davis: From Icon to Critical Theorist. The Marcusean Mind (pp. 39–43).
         Routledge.                                          
       Sheldon, D. A. (1998). Voices From within the Prison Walls. News and Letters.

[PAGE 28]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        26 Page 28 of 28                       A. Terwiel et al.
       Simpson, L.B. (2017) As We Have Always Done: Indigenous Freedom through Radical Resistance. Indig-
         enous Americas. University of Minnesota Press.      
       Simpson, L. B. (2025). Theory of Water: Nishnaabe Maps to the Times Ahead. Haymarket Books.
       Spivak, G. (1988). Can the Subaltern Speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.), Marxism and the Inter-
         pretation of Culture (pp. 271–313). Macmillan.      
       Steiker, C. S., & Steiker, J. M. (2020). The rise, fall, and afterlife of the death penalty in the United States.
         Annual Review of Criminology, 3(1), 299–315.        
       Taylor, K.-Y. (2016). From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation. Haymarket Books.
       Taylor, K. Y. (2021). The Emerging Movement for Police and Prison Abolition. The New Yorker. h t t p s : / / w
         w w . n e w y o r k e r . c o m / n e w s / o u r - c o l u m n i s t s / t h e - e m e r g i n g - m o v e m e n t - f o r - p o l i c e - a n d - p r i s o n - a b o l i t i o n /.
       Terwiel, A. (2020) What is carceral feminism? Political Theory 48(4): 421–442.
       Terwiel, A. (2025). Prison Abolition for Realists. University of Minnesota Press.
       Thompson, M. C. (2022). Phenomenal blackness: Black Power, Philosophy, and Theory. University of
         Chicago Press.                                      
       Tuana, N. (2006) The speculum of ignorance: The Women’s Health Movement and epistemologies of
         ignorance. Hypatia 21(3): 1–19.                     
       Turner, S.F., Davis, L.M., Fain, T., Braithwaite, H., Lavery, T., Choinski, W. and Camp, G. (2015) A
         national picture of prison downsizing strategies. Victims & Offenders. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 5 5 6
         4 8 8 6 . 2 0 1 5 . 1 0 7 8 1 8 5.                  
       Weeks, K. (2020). The problem with work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imagi-
         naries. Duke University Press.                      
       Woodly, D. R. (2015). The politics of common sense: How Social Movements Use Public Discourse to
         Change Politics and Win Acceptance. Oxford University Press.
       Woodly, D. R. (2022). Reckoning: Black Lives Matter and the Democratic Necessity of Social Movements.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             