[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:16            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00793-0            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation
       in the anthropocene                                   
                                                             
                                                             
       Carl Pierer1                                          
                                                             
       Accepted: 29 June 2025                                
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       This article develops an account of alienation that centres the way in which repro-
       ductive labour determines the constitution and shape of this world. The first part
       proposes a functionalist reading of the idea of the regeneration and reproduction
       of a liveable world as joint human and non-human labour. It draws on the Wages
       for Housework movement to argue that understanding reproduction as labour illu-
       minates the ways in which the ‘naturalness’ of reproduction emerges as a function
       of a deeper political decision to valorise production. The second part provides a
       hybrid reconstruction of alienation as a means to critique such an arrangement of
       labour, without inadvertently falling back on a reified notion of ‘nature’. I argue
       that this helps us keep track of the political construction of ‘nature’ which underlies
       the concepts of political theory we rely on. The third part ties both of these strands
       together: a political organisation of labour that relies on the ‘naturalisation’ of re-
       production alienates us by rendering it impossible to make our own fundamental
       decisions about the constitution of the collective. Thereby, it offers a way of holding
       onto the goal of emancipation in the Anthropocene.    
       Keywords Nature · Labour · Anthropocene · Alienation · Reproduction
                                                             
                                                             
       The ecological crises we are facing today, from climate change to mass species
       extinctions, seriously challenge our emancipatory aspirations.1 To the extent that,
                                                             
       1 Throughout the article, ‘us’ and its cognates aim to designate the inheritors of the concepts, categories
        and structures of thought of western modernity. This is deliberately vague to capture not only (political)
        theorists but also the way in which these categories have deeply structured the imagination of everyday
        life. To the extent that the article aims to turn these concepts against themselves, this points to a prob-
        lematic but seemingly inescapable dilemma in capturing political imaginaries. Because of its inherent
                                                             
         Carl Pierer                                         
         cp758@cam.ac.uk                                     
       1 University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 9DP, UK      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 2 of 19                           C. Pierer  
                                                             
       as Dipesh Chakrabarty has observed, our ‘mansion of modern freedoms stands on
       an ever-expanding foundation of fossil-fuel use’ (2021, p. 32), the pursuit of such
       freedoms has produced radical environmental transformations.2 The sheer scale of
       these transformations over the last two centuries has led some to claim that we are
       entering a novel geological epoch: the Anthropocene. While the International Union
       of Geological Sciences has rejected the Anthropocene as a distinct geological epoch,
       the idea that humanity collectively has transformed the environment to such an extent
       that it has become a geological force continues to inspire debate in the social scienc-
       es.3 The Anthropocene has frequently been criticised for diffusing responsibility for
       environmental destruction, assigning the blame to a generalised ‘humanity’ rather
       than specific causes such as capitalism or imperialism.4 Consequently alternatives
       that draw our attention to particular causes or aspect of this epoch proliferate, such as
       Capitalocene (Moore, 2016), Plantationocene (Mitman, 2019) or Chthulucene (Har-
       away, 2016).5 These differing approaches nonetheless share the insight that these
       environmental transformations are so profound that we can no longer assume ‘nature’
       to exist independently of and separate from humans.   
         As Chakrabarty (2009, 2021) and Latour (2008, 2010) have argued, this compels
       us to dismantle assumptions that nature is ‘fixed’ or ‘enduring’. These environmental
       transformations highlight that human relations to the planet are not what we thought
       them to be; they appear to have rendered the idea of nature as a constant, immutable
       backdrop to our political activities obsolete. While the debates of how to name and
       date this period are important and necessarily shape how we think about the challenge
       this poses,6 for the purposes of this article I shall use Anthropocene as a catch-all term
       to group investigations that seek to make sense of what these radical transformations
       of nature might mean, to home in on how we can make political sense of them. The
       Anthropocene serves as a shorthand for this period where what we consider to be
       nature is at stake and where the assumption that it exists independently and outside
       of politics itself needs to appear as a political problem.
         To the extent that the western political imaginary has relied precisely on such an
       understanding of nature to define its domain and content, this constitutes a major
       challenge for modern political thought. With the Anthropocene, we thus seem to be
       faced with a paradoxical situation where the limit of our political imaginary has to be
       understood politically. In this context, Latour (2008) has argued that, in order to make
       political sense of the manifold entanglements that the Anthropocenic crises present,
        tensions and contradictions, this unwieldy ‘us’ permits getting to these deeper features of ‘our’ under-
        standing. It captures a shared collective imaginary and thinking about such concepts as nature, politics,
        and labour, of which the contradictions and contestations are an important part.
       2 For a historical reconstruction of account of how modern understandings of freedom relate to abun-
        dance, see also Charbonnier (2020).                  
       3 On 20 March 2024, the International Union of Geological Sciences released a statement upholding an
        earlier decision by a lower committee to reject the ‘Anthropocene Epoch as a formal unit of the Geologic
        Time Scale’ (2024). For a history of the term, see Bonneuil and Fressoz (2013), Charbonnier (2017).
       4 See Fagan (2019) and Barca (2020).                  
       5 See also Hallé and Milon (2020).                    
       6 See Davis and Todd (2017).                          

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 3 of 19 16
                                                             
       and to avoid relying on predefined spheres of politics and nature, we require a means
       of tracking the continuous and repeated construction of nature.
         In this article, I develop the concept of hybrid alienation to provide such a means.
       Hybrid alienation arises from the way in which the boundaries of the collective,
       between nature and politics, human and non-human, production and reproduction,
       are drawn by capitalist forms of labour. As I argue in this article, because these forms
       of labour rely on a naturalisation of reproduction, they obscure that this capitalist
       organisation of the collective is a political choice. Produced by this obfuscation,
       hybrid alienation then consists in our inability to make these choices about reproduc-
       tion and more-than-human collectives our own.         
         To argue for this thesis, I build on existing literature that has attempted to bring
       modern emancipatory theories to bear on a politicisation of nature by paying attention
       to reproduction, in particular on Alyssa Battistoni’s conceptualisation of the mainte-
       nance and renewal of our common world through joint human and non-human activ-
       ity as a form of hybrid labour.7 If our political categories, and in particular those of
       freedom and emancipation, make it difficult to frame the question of the boundaries
       of the collective of politically relevant entities as political, the development of hybrid
       alienation contributes to this debate by indicating how we can bring such critical
       vocabulary of emancipatory theories to bear on questions of the constitution of the
       collective. That is, it provides normative reasons for why arrangements that determi-
       natively pre-settle the boundaries of this collective are wrong. In this way, the article
       advances efforts to combine the extension of our understanding of politics with the
       means to analyse more traditional forms of power and injustice. Secondly, the article
       identifies the limits of such hybridising approaches to existing political categories.
       By pushing the vocabulary of hybrid labour and alienation further, it shows that the
       distinctions between politics and nature, which arise at the boundaries of the collec-
       tive, may not be decisively resolved. Instead, I argue, these approaches stake out a
       space for political contestation in the continuous renegotiation of such distinctions.
         In the first part, I develop a functionalist reading of hybrid labour. Drawing on the
       Wages for Housework (WfH) movement, I argue that understanding reproduction
       as labour highlights how the ‘naturalness’ of reproduction emerges as a function of
       a deeper political decision to valorise production. This raises the problem of how to
       critique such an arrangement of labour without inadvertently falling back on a reified
       notion of nature. To address this, the second part proposes a similarly functionalist
       understanding of hybrid alienation, which sees humans and non-humans as alienated
       under a regime that naturalises reproduction. I argue that this helps us keep track of
       the political construction of nature, which underpins the concepts of political theory
       we rely on. The third part ties both of these strands together: a political organisation
       of labour that relies on the ‘naturalisation’ of reproduction alienates us by rendering
       it impossible to make fundamental decisions about the constitution of the collective
       our own. Through the critique of hybrid alienation, labour emerges as a key deter-
       minant of the constitution of the collective. Thus, hybrid alienation offers a way to
       adapt critical tools which have contributed to obscuring the political character of this
       constitution.                                         
       7 Barca (2020) and Krzywoszynska (2020).              

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 4 of 19                           C. Pierer  
       Hybrid Labour                                         
                                                             
       To extend our political categories to excluded ‘natural’ entities, Battistoni formulates
       the concept of hybrid labour. She defines this as: ‘a collective, distributed undertak-
       ing of humans and nonhumans acting to reproduce, regenerate, and renew a common
       world’ (2017, p. 6). While much of the debate on non-human labour thus far has
       focused on the question to what extent it is justified to talk about non-human or joint
       human and non-human labour, I argue that Battistoni’s point is best understood func-
       tionally, rather than ontologically.8 To do so, I reconstruct the context of Battistoni’s
       argument and trace its roots in the WfH movement.     
         Battistoni formulates her concept in dialogue with efforts to come to terms with
       the political agency of non-humans. This has led to an intricate debate about the onto-
       logical status of nature. New materialists, such as Jane Bennett (2004, 2010), have
       argued for what may be called a ‘monist’ conception, which challenges the binary
       separation of humans and non-humans and instead seeks to conceptualise an onto-
       logical continuity. Ecomarxists, such as Malm (2019) and Kohei Saito (2017b), have
       put forward an opposing dualist conception, which affirms the dialectical imbrication
       of society and nature premised on their conceptual distinctness.9 In part, this debate
       emerges as a reaction to an increasing awareness that a clear circumscription of the
       sphere of nature can no longer be achieved, which authors like Latour (2010) have
       long argued was precisely the governing conceit of western ‘modernity’. The con-
       ceptual difficulty that arises is how to consider this separation as a political decision.
         I propose that the concept of hybrid labour should be read as a way of coming to
       terms with this problem. Battistoni observes that new materialists such as Bennett or
       sympathetic thinkers such as Latour, offer important insights into the need to ‘bring
       in’ non-humans into the realm of political consideration, yet that they are ‘limited
       in addressing questions of power, politics, and economics’ (Battistoni, 2017, p. 13).
       These thinkers are attentive to the ways in which inherited forms of social critique,
       be it through a Marxist lens or other, tend to presuppose that the only politically
       relevant domain is that of the social. Latour, for instance, argues that an ontological
       reification of the ‘social’ as ‘a specific type of ingredient that is supposed to differ
       from other materials’ (Latour 2007, p. 1) obscures the fundamental processes that go
       into its composition and thereby illegitimately predefines what or who can be a part
       of it. However, by highlighting the extent to which this restriction is always already
       a political decision, these thinkers at the same time appear to deprive themselves of
       the means to conceptualise more traditional forms of power and politics or the pursuit
       of justice. Analyses of class or race, for instance, are almost entirely absent from the
       earlier writings.10                                   
       8 See Kallis and Swyngedouw’s (2017) discussion or Barua (2019).
       9 Malm (2019) calls this ‘property dualism’, whereas Saito (2017b) calls this a ‘non-Cartesian dualism’.
        Both of these are developed against Moore’s (2015) monist Marxist position. An explicit rejection of
        Bennett’s position is articulated by Cotter (2016). Recently, Skiveren (2023) has questioned the substan-
        tial differences between these approaches as well as the importance of these distinctions.
       10 More recently, such analyses have been forthcoming. For instance, Latour (2022) centres the question
       of class. The question of the extent to which ‘new materialisms’ allow for such analyses of power is also
       taken up in Washick et al. (2015).                    

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 5 of 19 16
                                                             
         While this is a recurrent critique of these approaches, the insight into the need for
       avoiding conceptual shortcuts such as ‘the social’ remains both valuable and genera-
       tive. On the one hand, if anything, paying careful attention to the composition of the
       collective (in Latourian terms) has become even more urgent today. This is because,
       with the destabilisation of nature through the unfolding environmental crises, the
       sphere of political action and consideration must be broadened. Latour has repeatedly
       stressed that we cannot rely on the idea that the community of the politically relevant
       entities is fixed and stable. Careful attention needs to be paid to how the collective
       is put together and how we can let this question appear as at the heart of political
       deliberation, rather than hide it - as Latour has argued the ‘moderns’ pretend to do
       - in the supposedly pre-political epistemological settlement, where nature becomes
       the domain of science and politics is restricted to the sphere of society. Against this,
       Latour understands nature not as prior to politics, but as already a political answer.
       To make sense of and track the entanglements of natural and social, human and non-
       human, it is necessary to home in on how these conceptual distinctions operate and
       come to be. Latour’s (2008) collective is meant to capture this procedural quality of
       assembling politically relevant entities, without deciding in advance along reified
       distinctions who or what might belong.                
         On the other hand, Chakrabarty (2009, 2014, 2021) has explored what it means
       to avoid shortcuts in this context where the developments of capitalism, colonialism,
       and globalisation have brought to the fore the planetary systems and processes that
       underpin the possibility of our biological survival. A similar debate concerning the
       space for conceptualizing traditional analyses of politics has developed around Cha-
       karbarty’s argument for bringing in the planetary strand of history as distinct from
       the social histories of capitalism and colonialism.11 This is no coincidence, for the
       ‘planetary’ produces analogous difficulties of conceptualising power, politics, and
       justice. These related debates highlight a recurring concern: if we need to keep track
       of the constantly evolving character of the collective of politically relevant entities,
       and thus cannot rely on such concepts as the ‘social’ which pre-emptively settle this
       question, how can this be combined with properly political analyses of power, injus-
       tice, and oppression, that seemingly rely on a well-defined social sphere?
         I argue that hybrid labour signals something new: by considering labour func-
       tionally, it becomes possible to appreciate that the valorisation of productive labour
       depends on a concomitant production of a concept of nature and reproduction. In the
       spirit of the processual understanding of politics, the functional analysis, rather than
       engaging the ontological debate, allows me to home in on how deeply our conceptual
       tools are shaped by the capitalist organisation of labour. Naturalness, in its imbrica-
       tion with labour, is functionally operative in the organisation of the space of politics.
       In the second part, I make the case that, because it obscures the political character of
       this organisation, naturalness constitutes a core obstacle to making decisions about
       this organisation our own, thereby alienating us.     
         To develop my functionalist reading of hybrid labour, I trace Battistoni’s argu-
       ment to its roots. Battistoni explicitly draws on the Marxist feminists of the 1970s,
       and in particular the WfH movement. The WfH idea serves, in Battistoni’s argument,
       11 See especially Getachew (2022).                    

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 6 of 19                           C. Pierer  
                                                             
       to make visible the obscured fact that reproduction of a common habitable world is
       already part of the economic calculus, in so far as it relies on continuous regeneration.
       There is, however, a latent difficulty for this analogy: while Battistoni seems to lean
       towards a positive valorisation of reproductive labour, it is not clear that the WfH
       movement, at least during its early years, pursued a similar goal.
         In its early configuration, the WfH movement was ambiguous about what the wage
       demand meant: whether it constitutes a demand for material recompense (and hence
       recognition) of reproductive labour as labour, or whether it is simply a functional
       demand to make visible reproduction as labour to highlight the political decisions
       underlying the present configuration. For several WfH theoreticians, notably Silvia
       Federici and Mariarosa Dalla Costa, the demand served as a tool to uncover the deep
       ways in which the naturalisation of reproduction is bound up with a capitalist organ-
       isation of the world which valorises productive labour. Read against the intellectual
       backdrop of Italian operaismo out of which Dalla Costa’s and Federici’s approaches
       develop, the demand is related to the strategy of refusal: it serves to make reproduc-
       tion visible as work so that, like work, it could be rejected. On the other hand, the
       WfH strand developed by Margaret Prescod (1980), and after the initial years of the
       movement also by Selma James, was quite explicit in exacting payment for the labour
       of housework, linking it to reparations for historic injustices.
         In the longer history, the first strand, represented by Dalla Costa and Federici,
       broke with the WfH movement in 1977/7812, while the second continued and
       expanded its demands around the wage, abandoning the earlier ambiguity. In 1977, at
       the National Women’s Conference in November, Prescod, as a delegate for the WfH
       Campaign, successfully lobbied for a change in terminology in the government’s reg-
       ulation, replacing ‘welfare’ with ‘wage’ (Love, 2006, p. 368). Throughout the 1980s
       and 1990s, the movement expanded its network to forge ties between activists in the
       global north and south. In its current form, it is a network actively represented in
       India, Ireland, Peru, Thailand, the United Kingdom and the United States. At the turn
       of the millennium, the movement organised a Global Women’s Strike, which is also
       the name under which the contemporary movement is now better known.
         More recently, the movement has further expanded the demand for a care income
       covering both care for people and the planet. In this evolution, the demand for com-
       pensation for reproductive labour has at the same time expanded in scope and shed all
       ambiguity. It is now a clear call for monetary compensation, as for instance expressed
       by James and Nina Lopez when they write: ‘[Care Income] can pay a living wage
       to mothers and other primary carers of people, thus beginning to end poverty, start-
       ing with that of mothers and children, the poorest everywhere’ (2021, p. 77). In this
       article, the authors lament that while the importance of care work has been widely
       accepted, it did not lead to financial recognition. Consequently, they argue, ‘[t]o make
       that same demand today, when it is acknowledged as crucial work and measured and
       valued many times over is to avoid the payment, denying the worker the money she
       has earned’ (James & Lopez, 2021, p. 63). In other words, if, as Forrester (2022) has
       also argued, the demand no longer has the same disclosing power it held in the 1970s,
       12 See Toupin (2018) for a history of these early years.
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 7 of 19 16
                                                             
       because these reproductive activities have been recognised as labour, it would seem
       that its main function today can only be to exact monetary compensation.
         However, I propose that returning to the original ambiguity of the demand, rep-
       resented for instance by Federici, allows us to think differently about the work that
       labour does. Thus, by homing in on the first strand of the movement, I seek to recover
       some of the insights that its later developments have sidelined: specifically, the inac-
       cessibility of an untainted form of reproduction which could be used to critique capi-
       talism. The refusal of work under capitalism, in both its productive and reproductive
       configuration, propounded by this strand, facilitates a radical interrogation of politi-
       cal categories, such that, as I shall argue, naturalness can appear as a political prob-
       lem to help us confront our Anthropocenic predicament.
         In one of the foundational texts of the movement, Women and the Subversion of
       the Community, Dalla Costa and James13 identify the wage as crucial for tracking
       how capitalism has restructured social relations, for it divided those who worked
       in factories and received a wage from those who were excluded and did not. It is
       only by assigning necessary reproductive activities to women in the capitalist family
       structure that capital ‘has ‘liberated’ the man from these functions so that he is com-
       pletely ‘free’ for direct exploitation; so that he is free to ‘earn’ enough for a woman to
       reproduce him as labor power’ (Dalla Costa & James, 1975, pp. 33–34). The authors
       in this early text are more interested in the revolutionary perspective and explicitly
       oppose the demand for monetary compensation:          
         [T]he demand that would follow, namely, ‘pay us wages for housework’, would
         run the risk of looking, in the light of the present balance of power in Italy, as
         though we wanted further to entrench the conditions of institutionalized slavery
         that are produced with the condition of housework (…) [W]e must discover
         forms of struggle that immediately break the whole structure of domestic work,
         rejecting it absolutely, rejecting our role as housewives and the home as the
         ghetto of our existence, since the problem is not only to stop doing this work
         but to smash the entire role of housewife (Dalla Costa & James, 1975, p. 36).
       This perspective highlights an important difference with contemporary versions of the
       movement. While both reject the capitalist exploitation of reproductive labour, this
       early approach more radically calls into question our conceptual categories. Where
       the contemporary iteration identifies reproductive labour, or care, as ‘the foundation
       of every society’ (James, 2022), these early texts of the movement are keenly aware
       of how deeply this capitalist restructuring of social relations has shaped our concep-
       tual categories. On this account, there is no easy way to conceive a pure and positive
       form of reproductive labour that is not distorted by capitalism, and this is why it has
       to be rejected absolutely.                            
         Federici makes a similar point and highlights that the wage demand reveals repro-
       ductive labour not only as exploited but also configured in a specific way by capital.
       13 The authorship of this text is a matter of dispute, see James (2012) and Dalla Costa’s statement (2012)
       published in response. Because this dispute is unresolved, I have opted to refer to the 1975 edition of the
       text, and refer to James and Dalla Costa as the joint authors.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 8 of 19                           C. Pierer  
                                                             
       Indeed, part of the epistemic shift she tried to achieve consisted precisely in chal-
       lenging the supposed naturalness of women becoming housewives and doing house-
       work. Growing up in post-World War II Italy, in a socially conservative but rapidly
       reindustrialising country, Federici stresses that her starting point was the refusal of
       the type of work to which she was ‘naturally’ destined (Federici, 2016, 2018). As
       she highlights, what capital recognises as work suggests that there is a well-defined
       period during which labour-force is expended in the factory, an activity that is com-
       pensated through a wage, and that the time outside this period belongs to the worker.
       For the WfH movement such a definition of work must be rejected, as even the time
       outside the factory is structured by services to capital. Work, on Federici’s account,
       should be understood more broadly than simply as the time spent at the factory: ‘But
       we have never belonged to ourselves, we have always belonged to capital for every
       moment of our lives and it is time that we make capital pay for every moment of it.
       In class terms this is to demand a wage for every moment we live at the service of
       capital’ (2012, p. 51). Such an expansive understanding of work deliberately enters
       into conflict with the idea that reproduction happens ‘naturally’, removed from eco-
       nomic considerations. It uncovers naturalisation as a strategy by capital to situate
       activities outside its domain, so that they may better be exploited. To make structures
       appear as natural is understood as a capitalist reworking of the world to facilitate the
       creation and appropriation of surplus value. (Feminine) nature is here understood as
       part of the capitalist construction of work. Reproduction appears as the natural flip-
       side of production: productive labour is only possible in so far as it is accompanied
       by the naturalisation of reproduction. For this reason, this is a functional rather than
       an ontological analysis of work.                      
         Maria Mies’ development of the WfH analysis (2014) helpfully illustrates this
       difference. Mies extends this analysis to cover the ways in which other forms of non-
       waged labour, in particular by women in the Third World, are exploited in analogous
       ways. What holds these analyses together, ultimately, on Mies’ account is that it is
       work done mostly by women. However, there is an important difference between
       Mies’ and the autonomist strand of the WfH movement’s reasons for considering
       reproductive labour to be work. For Mies, reproduction is work because it is a:
         truly human, that is, conscious, social activity. Women appropriated their own
         nature, their capacity to give birth and to produce milk in the same way as
         men appropriated their own bodily nature, in the sense that their hands and
         head, etc., acquired skills through work and reflection to make and handle tools.
         In this sense, the activity of women in bearing and rearing children has to be
         understood as work (Mies, 2014, p. 53).             
       Conversely, the functional interpretation of the WfH argument suggests that repro-
       ductive labour is work because of its relation to productive labour. That is, it is a
       condition of possibility of productive labour and forms a functional whole under
       capitalism. While on Mies’ account reproductive activity is always work, just under
       capitalism it happens to be unwaged and exploited, on my interpretation of the WfH
       argument reproductive activity is work in the same sense as productive activity,
       because they function in a comparable way under capitalism.
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 9 of 19 16
                                                             
         This entails differing views on nature. For Mies there is an undistorted, natural
       form of reproduction that is fully productive, i.e. an expression of human creativ-
       ity, conscious and social. This view would appear to reaffirm the rigid distinction
       between human and nature that the Anthropocene discourse has called into question.
       In contrast, I suggest that my functional interpretation of the WfH argument makes
       visible the contingent construction of this distinction.
         This aligns with Moishe Postone’s (1996) distinction between ‘a critique of labour
       in capitalism’ and ‘critiques of capitalism from the standpoint of labour’. Postone
       argues that traditional Marxism has relied on a transhistorical notion of labour to
       provide a critique of capitalism. It has mistakenly reified industrial types of labour
       as the expression of a deep human capacity, rather than analyse it as a historically
       contingent product of the capitalist social form. While Mies rejects industrial labour,
       she appropriates a Marxist view insofar as what makes reproductive activity mean-
       ingful, valuable, and human on her account is that it is a productive expression of
       human capacities. In contrast, the WfH demand in its autonomist form challenges
       the premises of production and reproduction, as well as their apparent naturalness.
       The demand, on this reading, reveals that productive wage labour is also naturalised
       as an expression of something intrinsically human. Mies rejects the identification of
       productive labour with ‘the head and the hand’, or ‘men’s object relation to nature’,
       as the only kind of work that patriarchy valorises. Even if she gives ‘productive’ a
       different twist, because she ultimately does not reject the idea that a productive use
       of nature is essentially human, this approach does not let nature become a political
       problem in the way that the Anthropocene predicament requires.
         To summarise, the autonomist strand of the WfH movement instrumentalises the
       wage-demand to make reproduction visible as work. However, at least for the rep-
       resentatives influenced by the Italian context, this was not (or not straightforwardly)
       meant to be work that ought to be remunerated, and thereby institutionalised. Rather,
       for some in the WfH movement, just like the productive work enforced by the capi-
       talist in the factory, the reproductive work in the social factory at the service of capital
       ought to be rejected. Making it visible as work would make it possible to contest (and
       reject) it on the same grounds. On this conception, capital simultaneously organises
       the sphere of productive labour and the sphere of reproductive labour, both are co-
       constitutive of each other. Moreover, it hides this organisation by assimilating the
       latter sphere to nature and the private home. Two important insights emerge from this
       argument: firstly, labour is not simply an ahistoric human quality, but rather is intrin-
       sically linked to a political organisation of both the social and the natural sphere.
       Secondly, naturalness operates to obscure the first insight.
         Contesting the presumed naturalness of female characteristics may be seen as a
       common feature of many strands of feminism. The uniqueness of this strand of the
       WfH movement’s approach lies in its ambiguous casting of housework as work to be
       ultimately able to reject it, which allowed for the insight into the ways in which natu-
       ralness intersects with the reification of labour. The early WfH movement’s argument
       does not simply seek to denaturalise housework, i.e. to remove reproductive labour
       from the sphere of nature and bring it into the sphere of political contestation, but also
       facilitates - as I shall expand further below - making the constitution of nature itself
       into a political problem.                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 10 of 19                          C. Pierer  
                                                             
         If the conclusion of the preceding section is that, on the WfH movement’s account,
       naturalised reproduction must be resisted in order to resist the exploitation of produc-
       tive forces, where does this leave us? The analogy with the WfH movement appears
       to break down because, in the midst of environmental disaster, rejecting the hybrid
       labour of reproducing and regenerating our habitable world seems to be the last thing
       we would want. While Battistoni’s explicit aim is to endow the consideration of non-
       human agency with the means to account for traditional forms of power and injustice,
       the need to make visible the political construction of nature is only latently present.
       With the focus on the refusal of reproductive labour by one strand of the WfH move-
       ment, this point comes to the fore and naturalness is centred as operative in occlud-
       ing the political character of the construction of nature. The functionalist reading
       of hybrid labour highlights that questions concerning the organisation of labour are
       inextricably entangled with the ways in which we think about nature and politics.
       In this light, we may ask: how can we relate this deeper political question about the
       construction of nature to a critique of the valorisation of production, without relying
       on a reified notion of nature? The next part develops a functionalist account of hybrid
       alienation which captures the idea that, naturalisation, on which the valorisation of
       production depends, prevents us from making this deeper political question our own.
       In other words, naturalisation presents this question as already settled for us.
       Hybrid Alienation                                     
                                                             
       The naturalness of reproduction emerges as a function of a deeper political decision
       to valorise production. At the same time, to the extent that they are committed to
       inherited notions of the political, the concepts we have available to criticise this valo-
       risation of production reproduce or rely on the very ideas of nature that have become
       unsustainable. Thereby, through naturalisation, this arrangement alienates us from
       the fundamental decisions concerning the composition of the collective. This is prop-
       erly diagnosed as alienation because such a description centres the idea that we ought
       to be able to deliberate on such fundamental political decisions, that it is normatively
       wrong if they are pre-settled through a determination of what nature is. However, to
       avoid falling back on an uncritical naturalness, it must also be understood as a hybrid
       phenomenon. That is, humans and non-humans are alienated, in a functionalist sense,
       under a regime that naturalises reproduction. This I call ‘hybrid alienation’.
         At the same time, this framing creates a tension. While hybrid alienation serves
       to criticise pre-settled notions of nature, in casting this as a matter for deliberation it
       relies on a distinction between those who can and those cannot deliberate. This would
       appear to reproduce the human-nature distinction in a different guise. This tension is
       intentional. In calling for deliberation, hybrid alienation underscores that these prob-
       lems are constitutive of our political categories, and we may not be able to overcome
       them. Rather than fully or decisively resolve these distinctions, this makes visible
       the processual construction and continuous renegotiation of these political boundar-
       ies. Thereby it identifies a space for political contestation and reconfiguration that is
       obfuscated by pre-settled notions of nature. Thus, the functionalist account of hybrid
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 11 of 19 16
                                                             
       alienation I develop in this section offers a means to critique such an arrangement of
       labour, all while making visible the contingent construction of nature.
         While emerging from an entirely different context and with no explicit commit-
       ment to theorising the problems of this article, Rahel Jaeggi’s (2006) reconstruction
       of alienation lets us think fruitfully about the above as a case of alienation. Sketched
       briefly, on Jaeggi’s account, what situations of alienation have in common is that for
       some reason we fail to identify with the situation as our own doing. Jaeggi points out
       that: ‘What we are alienated from is always at once alien and our own’ (2014, p. 24)
       We are alienated if we cannot identify with what is our creation as a product of our
       own actions. Importantly, this realisation implies that we are only ever alienated from
       our own creations. Building on this, Jaeggi develops her key insight: the object of
       alienation is never alien to us. Being alienated is more than the object of alienation
       simply being foreign or strange but comes with the additional claim that it should
       stand in a different relationship to us. As she writes: ‘Being alienated from something
       means having become distanced from something in which one is in fact involved or
       to which one is in fact related—or in any case ought to be’ (Jaeggi, 2014, p. 25). Put
       differently, a progressive critique of alienation captures the conditions under which
       we can appropriate (sich aneignen) the world in such a way that we can perceive
       ourselves fully in this act (Jaeggi, 2014, p. 23).    
         Two ideas here are particularly important for my argument. Firstly, Jaeggi’s con-
       cept of alienation does not attempt to flesh out what we are alienated from but rather
       explains how alienation operates and what its effects are. She focuses our attention
       on the kind of relation alienation is and thereby attempts to remain agnostic about the
       content from which we are alienated. This is a fine line to tread, for Jaeggi wishes to
       address worries concerning the commitment to essentialism that analyses of alien-
       ation have historically entailed, all the while holding onto the normative force such
       diagnoses bring. Whereas Jaeggi’s account may ultimately need to fall back on some
       sort of essentialism to retain this normative force, as I shall discuss further below,
       I also argue that this need not be an obstacle for the functionalist, hybrid account
       I am developing here. Secondly, Jaeggi’s reconstruction heavily relies on the idea
       of appropriation as Aneignung rather than Besitzergreifung.14 With this distinction,
       Jaeggi stresses the notions of learning and concomitant ideas about the transforma-
       tion of the subject that accompany the former, against the ideas of taking possession
       that unambiguously define the latter.                 
         Building on Jaeggi’s reconstruction, the diagnosis of alienation as a failure to
       make the world one’s own, to be able to navigate this world fully, provides the means
       to hold together the two aspects elaborated earlier. In this sense the naturalisation of
       reproduction is alienating: as long as we fail to bring in the ways in which answers to
       the questions of labour co-determine nature we cannot make this world our own. To
       the extent that the world of our collective is constituted by who or what can become
       part of it, and this question is, among other things, settled by the ways in which we
       14 Jaeggi makes this distinction in the original German (2006, pp. 64–67), and in footnote 48 points to
       the fact that this distinction does not exist in English. Consequently it does not appear as such in the Eng-
       lish translation (Jaeggi, 2014, pp. 37–40). Nonetheless, the idea that Aneignung denotes something that
       exceeds mere possession is developed there.           

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 12 of 19                          C. Pierer  
                                                             
       organise labour, those forms of organisation that naturalise reproduction thereby also
       obscure the political character of this arrangement. Thus unable to make this arrange-
       ment, and the structuring of the world it produces, our own, such arrangements pro-
       duce alienation. At the same time, this must be considered a hybrid form of alienation.
       Much like hybrid labour serves to unearth the functional equivalence between human
       and non-human activity, the claim to the hybridity of alienation in this case is a func-
       tional one. If we consider alienation a purely human phenomenon, we inadvertently
       reproduce an externalised, non-human, nature without making visible the political
       character of such a move. Claiming that humans and non-humans are functionally
       alienated serves to bring a normative critique to bear on the problem of naturalised
       reproduction, while at the same time making visible the political character of nature.
       It is important to highlight this shift from Jaeggi’s reconstruction, which proceeds
       through the thick descriptions of highly individualised cases of alienation. While
       hybrid alienation draws on crucial insights of Jaeggi’s reconstruction, it situates the
       diagnosis on a collective, rather than an individual level. Hybrid alienation no longer
       diagnoses situations where an individual might fail to make their world their own,
       but rather where the collective is inhibited from appropriating its political decisions.
         This hybridized notion of alienation may face criticism from at least two camps.
       On the one hand, broadly Marxist inspired theorists might resist this idea because it
       mixes up what are properly natural dynamics with social ones, where the latter are
       to be blamed on capitalism. On the other hand, environmentalists interested in the
       intrinsic value of nature and in pushing against anthropocentrism may object to the
       use of such a deeply humanist category as alienation. I believe that while both touch
       on important features, these objections lead to asking the wrong questions about this,
       and I show instead where the functionalist account can truly shine.15
         Marxists, especially eco-Marxists, tend to see hybridity critically. Malm (2018,
       2019), for instance, argues for the need to keep nature and society analytically sepa-
       rate, so as to be able to hold those human actors responsible that brought us into
       this mess.16 More broadly, while there has been a revisionist moment arguing that
       Marx may have been a more environmentally attuned thinker than he has been given
       credit for, these to some extend tend to reify nature as the background condition of
       human development.17 Much like Marxists tend to understand labour as a purely
       human phenomenon,18 they are likely to insist on the importance of resisting the
       hybridisation of alienation. Similar resistance, albeit with a different spin, may come
       15 See Biro (2005) and Hailwood (2015) for previous attempts to make alienation useful for environmental
       thought. Neither of these approaches centres the political decisions around nature.
       16 On the idea that the ontological distinctness of nature and politics is necessary for human responsibility,
       see Skiveren (2023).                                  
       17 The groundwork for this was laid by John Bellamy Foster’s Marx’s Ecology (2000), but the litera-
       ture has proliferated since, ranging from ecological readings of Marx (e.g. Foster et al. (2011), Saito
       (2017a, 2023) to other works on the ecological crisis that invoke a broadly Marxist frame of reference,
       such as Hornborg (2019) and Fraser (2022). Despite their significant theoretical differences, these works
       reject implicitly or explicitly the idea that the current crises require thinking about hybridity. On this, see
       also the discussion in Battistoni (2017).             
       18 Battistoni anticipates some of the resistance to her extension, but her proposal has been critically
       attacked, for instance by Büscher (2022). See also the discussion of monism in Saito (2023)—chapter 4,
       footnote 28—or Hornborg’s (2020) critique of Jason W. Moore.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 13 of 19 16
                                                             
       from environmental thinkers who have long been critical of the anthropocentrism
       that underlies much political thought. If we hope to extend such a profoundly human
       category as alienation to include non-humans, such criticisms need to be addressed.
       Both critiques shift the focus to asking if these categories can really be said to hold of
       non-humans. Thereby, they lose track of the theoretical payoff and strengths of this
       hybrid analysis, which I suggest lies in its functionalism, rather than its essential or
       ontological claims. That is, the critique of hybrid labour or hybrid alienation as an
       undue extension of properly human categories to the natural world misses that these
       are assessments of the functional operation of the capitalist organisation. Neither Bat-
       tistoni’s hybrid labour nor my proposed hybrid alienation is committed to the claim
       that non-humans labour or are alienated in any essential sense. Rather, understanding
       labour and alienation as hybrid processes, which structure and define what we con-
       sider natural, reveals the role played by the restricted, non-hybrid versions of these
       concepts in upholding the capitalist organisation of the material world.
         Nonetheless, both critiques touch on an important point: the latent essentialism
       of alienation. For instance, the Marxist critique of alienation frequently relies on
       the idea that alienated labour dehumanises us by distancing us from some human
       essence.19 While Jaeggi’s reconstruction explicitly aims to avoid such essentialism,
       there are at least two key moments in her argument where she seemingly has to rely
       on it in some form or other.20 However, both moments pertain to questions of self-
       appropriation and it is due to this individualist focus that these moments are trouble-
       some. With the shift towards a more collective perspective in hybrid alienation, this
       problem disappears. For even if hybrid alienation had to rely on some essentialism
       to make the idea stick that it arises from a failed appropriation by the collective of its
       constitution, this would merely require a commitment to the irreducibly and essen-
       tially political character of the collective. It may be that we need to commit to the
       point that the collective is fundamentally political to argue that, as long as reproduc-
       tion is naturalised, we are alienated from the constitution of the collective. However,
       the very point of hybrid alienation is to underscore that the constitution of the collec-
       tive is a political question.                         
         A distinct worry concerns the idea that the notion of appropriation can be made
       useful for environmental thought. Due to its imbrication with domination and exploi-
       tation, environmental thinkers have viewed appropriation critically.21 However, with
       the distinction between Aneignung and Besitzergreifung made earlier, the idea under-
       pinning Jaeggi’s concept of appropriation is one of identifying with the world and
       recognising the extent to which this world might resist such domineering attitudes.
       At the same time, this seems to be somewhat contradicted when Jaeggi puts forth that
       to not be alienated, to lead one’s own life, one has then to become ‘master over one’s
       own desires and decisions’ (2014, p. 202). In the context of hybrid alienation, such
       terminology must sit uneasily with environmental concerns because it seems to har-
       ken back to much criticised ideas of mastering nature. While Jaeggi does not address
       such concerns, it is possible to see that she conceives of appropriation as a relation
       19 See for example Braverman (1998).                  
       20 See Jaeggi (2014, pp. 162–164; 168–170).           
       21 On this point specifically, see Beau and Larrère (2018).

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 14 of 19                          C. Pierer  
                                                             
       that recognises as much the transformation of the world as the resistance this world
       offers to the complete subjection to the will. This means the fluency required for this
       mastery means also coming to terms with the independent existence of this world.
       Even if ultimately the distinction between Aneignung and Besitzergreifung does not
       hold up, and alienation cannot be dissociated from the idea that one ought to master
       and dominate one’s world, this need not reproduce such attitudes towards nature.
         On a minimal account, it would be sufficient for the diagnosis of hybrid alienation
       to point to our inability to navigate questions concerning the political organisation of
       the world, as long as parts thereof are obscured by naturalised reproduction, because
       it presettles the question of the composition of the collective. At the same time, this
       worry also touches on a troublesome aspect of alienation as failed appropriation.
       Some environmental thinkers view appropriation critically because it requires a thor-
       ough socialisation of nature. That is, nature would only become legible to the extent
       that we have made it our own. The critique here is that nature disappears entirely
       from the picture: it would not have any existence independent of its appropriation for
       human use or concern.22 Not even the minimal account of appropriation would seem
       able to skirt this risk. It is important to be precise here: the alienation diagnosis offers
       a way to make the question of what is excluded from the collective, in Latourian
       terms, into a conscious political question, to which there can only ever be temporary
       answers and no definitive solution. It is this constantly negotiated question that we
       (humans and non-humans) fail to appropriate under the present condition of alien-
       ation. There is thus room for something like 'nature' to exist outside the sphere of
       human appropriation, but where this line is drawn ought to be visible as the political
       question it is.                                       
         Both concerns hark back to the tension mentioned at the beginning of this section:
       the inability of such a humanist category as alienation to avoid reinscribing a human/
       nature distinction. We may ultimately be unable to fully overcome these distinctions
       that so deeply structure our political vocabulary. Yet, as I further flesh out in the
       next part, hybrid alienation indicates how we can take responsibility for a processual
       drawing of these distinctions and make this into a matter of continuous renegotiation.
       Labouring Collectives                                 
       The previous part has argued that the naturalisation of reproduction is alienating
       because it renders it impossible for us to make our own the profound political ques-
       tions about the constitution of the collective. The functionalist reading of hybrid
       labour advocated in the first part reveals labour as a crucial factor in the composition
       of the collective. If the causal factor of our alienation is the naturalisation of repro-
       duction, this lets us critique the valorisation of production while also bringing into
       view the political construction of nature. The occlusion of this political construction
       through naturalisation is at the source of our alienation. Hybrid alienation lets us cri-
       tique the pre-emptive settling of the constitutive questions of the collective through
                                                             
       22 Hailwood (2015).                                   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 15 of 19 16
                                                             
       organisations of labour without inadvertently relying on a predefined sphere of nature
       because it centres the troublesome reification of nature in the organisation of labour.
         Labour’s role in the constitution of the collective is highlighted contemporary
       investigations of multispecies entanglements in ongoing struggles. Chao (2021)
       describes how oil palm plantations in West Papua with their non-human ‘friends’ and
       ‘enemies’ are crucial aspects of the definition of the collective. On the one hand, the
       plantation’s biological homogeneity makes it uniquely vulnerable to parasites. These
       non-human actors afford paths of resistance to the kinds of development proposed
       by the labours of agribusiness. On the other hand, Marind workers are hired in the
       plantations to exterminate these parasites and foster the growth of organisms that
       have developed mutualistic relationships with the oil palm. The entanglements of the
       Marind workers with non-human actors capture the complex questions any collective
       faces. In this complicated and ambiguous relationship to the oil palm plantation, the
       question of labour lets us recover the question of the constitution of the collective.
       The way we organise labour determines at the same time how we live together with
       the non-human other. Banerjee and Wouters (2022) seize on a similar issue with their
       concept of ‘multispecies demos’, On their account, if the industrial exploitation of
       non-human beings cannot be dissociated from the restriction of political community
       to humans, this is but one way of organising the collective life of humans and non-
       humans. They urge us to recover ‘ancient and living multispecies polities—we must
       reinvigorate diverse vocabularies of interspecies pact making—in order to construct
       a more-than-human planetary demos’ (Banerjee & Wouters, 2022, p. 125). Starting
       from already existing revolutionary communities, especially in the global south, they
       frequently appears to rely on the idea that pre-capitalist communities offer a nor-
       mative reservoir that can readily be tapped to provide alternatives. Yet, if we fol-
       low the strand of labour that also emerges in these struggles as a critical category,
       this can translate to an immanent critique. Banerjee and Wouters find inspiration in
       more-than-human resistance with a feminist twist to this capitalist organisation.23 For
       instance, they suggest that yak refusal to subordination, to recognize borders, and to
       comply with excessive demands through milking or forced impregnation, indicates a
       potential for a multispecies feminist resistance to the capitalist exploitation of labour.
       Through the lens of hybrid labour and alienation, this refusal can appear as a chal-
       lenge to the capitalist naturalisation of these processes. The refusal indicates that
       these arrangements are not simply pre-settled by nature but rather continue to be
       matters of ongoing negotiations and contestations. The problem of hybrid alienation
       emerges most clearly in contexts such as the plantation or yak exploitation where the
       naturalisations that underpin the production/reproduction pairing are in the process
       of being put in place.                                
         With this, we can then ask what forms of collectively organising labour do not
       alienate us from these constitutive questions of the collective by requiring us to rely
       on a naturalised reproduction? In part, this already indicates its own resolution: as
       23 While Banerjee and Wouters reference the WfH demand when they call for ‘wages for animals and
       plants who labor and create value for us. And then we shall replace the wage form altogether by an abun-
       dance where our communities will freely give what we require for being’ (2022, pp. 121–122), this link is
       not developed any further.                            

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 16 of 19                          C. Pierer  
                                                             
       long as we naturalise reproduction, we cannot make constitutive decisions about the
       collective our own because we inadvertently rely on a pre-defined sphere of nature.
       The question of labour is thus inscribed at the heart of the constitution of the col-
       lective. Hybrid labour underscores the fact that the question of who is politically
       relevant and who we can live with is intrinsically related to the forms of labour we
       valorise. Part of the problem we face, as the WfH movement’s autonomist argument
       has revealed, is that, because the contemporary understanding of labour relies on a
       reification of nature, it has to be turned against itself. Therefore, what the functionalist
       reading of hybrid labour underscores is that the question of whether nonhumans truly
       labour is beside the point because the important insight is that their role and indeed
       ‘nature’ is determined by the way we organise labour. The shape of this common
       world is not presettled but emerges as the result of labour negotiations that recognize
       the activities of human and nonhuman workers. It is determined by answers to ques-
       tions such as who is part of the collective but also what global average temperature
       reigns over the planet. In other words, hybrid labour provides us with the means of
       tracing these complex entanglements. However, the normative issue, from this per-
       spective, with the current, capitalist organisation of labour and the answers it gives
       to these questions is that it impedes our appropriation of the constitutive questions of
       the collective. In this sense humans and non-humans are alienated from the process
       of composing the collective. Analogously with hybrid labour above, the question of
       whether non-humans can be truly said to be alienated would miss the point because
       the functional understanding is supposed to highlight the normative issue at stake in
       such an organisation of the collective. The point then is to recognise the centrality of
       labour in the composition of the collective for our political lives and emancipatory
       aspirations. This would require us to challenge our hybrid alienation.
         Yet, this does not resolve the tension mentioned earlier. Insofar as it reproduces a
       distinction between those who deliberate and those who do not, the critique of hybrid
       alienation underscores the limits of such a hybridisation of our political categories.
       The hybrid, functional understanding advocated here can only make such distinctions
       visible as progressively configured and continuously renegotiated, rather than settle
       them once and for all. While we may not be able to definitively overcome the prob-
       lems highlighted by hybrid alienation, the critique opens a space where the drawing
       of these boundaries becomes a key site of political contestation.
       Conclusion                                            
       In this article, I have developed functionalist accounts of both hybrid labour and
       hybrid alienation to argue that a political organisation of labour which relies on the
       naturalisation of reproduction alienates us by rendering it impossible to make fun-
       damental decisions about the constitution of the collective our own. Through the
       critique of hybrid alienation, the question of labour emerged as a key determinant of
       the constitution of the collective.                   
         These then are the merits of this hybrid understanding of alienation: It contributes
       to efforts such as Battistoni’s to furnish considerations of nonhuman political agency
       with the means to analyse more conventional forms of power and injustice. By tying
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 17 of 19 16
                                                             
       the critique of reified nature to questions of the organisation of labour, the functional-
       ist reading of hybrid labour makes visible that unjust and exploitative arrangements
       of labour are entangled with the construction of nature and fundamental questions
       concerning the constitution of the collective. Importantly, however, this leaves unre-
       solved the problem of how to reject such an arrangement without falling back on a
       reified nature or relying on conceptual shortcuts such as ‘the social’. I have argued
       that hybrid alienation addresses this by providing normative reasons for why arrange-
       ments that pre-settle the constitution of the collective are wrong. Hybrid alienation
       thus indicates a way whereby we can bring such critical vocabulary of emancipa-
       tory theories to bear on questions of the constitution of the collective. As a result, if
       labour is reinscribed in this way as a central problem for the collective, at stake in the
       tracking and paying careful attention to the constitution of the collective are not only
       questions of ontology and epistemology, but also those of emancipation.
       Acknowledgements I presented versions of this article at the 9th Political Theory Graduate Conference
       (Sciences Po), organised by Marius Bickhardt, Gauthier Delozière, Maxime Gaborit, Léo Grillet, Claire
       Lejeune, and Léna Silberzahn, as well as at the 2023 Annual Conference of the British and Ireland Asso-
       ciation for Political Thought, organised by Udit Bhatia, Maxime Lepoutre, and Ashwini Vasanthakumar.
       I would like to thank the organisers and conference participants for their invaluable input, as well as the
       Cambridge Trust and St Edmund's College for their financial support enabling me to participate in these
       conferences. In addition, I would also like to thank Duncan Kelly, Alyssa Battistoni, Sam Harrison, Nanna
       Sætan, Baptiste Albertone, Benjamin Tan, Alina Utrata, and the members of the Cambridge Political The-
       ory/History of Political Thought Writing Workshop for discussions and criticisms of earlier drafts, as well
       as three anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions.
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
       is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n
       s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / .                               
       References                                            
       Banerjee, M., & Wouters, J. J. P. (2022). Subaltern Studies 2.0: Being against the Capitalocene. Paradigm
         62. Prickly Paradigm.                               
       Barca, S. (2020). Forces of Reproduction: Notes for a Counter-Hegemonic Anthropocene. Cambridge ele-
         ments. Elements in environmental humanities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Barua, M. (2019). Animating Capital: Work, Commodities, Circulation. Progress in Human Geography,
         43(4), 650–669. SAGE Publications Ltd.              
       Battistoni, A. (2017). Bringing in the Work of Nature: From Natural Capital to Hybrid Labor. Political
         Theory, 45(1), 5–31.                                
       Beau, R., & Larrère, C. (Eds.). (2018). Penser l’Anthropocène . Les Presses Sciences Po.
       Biro, A. (2005). Denaturalizing Ecological Politics: Alienation from Nature from Rousseau to the Frank-
         furt School and beyond. University of Toronto.      
       Bonneuil, C., & Fressoz, J-B. (2013). L’événement anthropocène: La Terre, l’histoire et nous. Editions
         du Seuil                                            

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        16 Page 18 of 19                          C. Pierer  
       Braverman, H., & Foster, J. B. (1998). Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the
         Twentieth Century. 25th anniversary edition. New York: Monthly Review Press.
       Büscher, B. (2022). The Nonhuman Turn: Critical Reflections on Alienation, Entanglement and Nature
         under Capitalism. Dialogues in Human Geography, 12(1), 54–73. SAGE Publications.
       Chakrabarty, D. (2009). The Climate of History: Four Theses. Critical Inquiry, 35(2), 197–222.
       Chakrabarty, D. (2014). Climate and Capital: On Conjoined Histories. Critical Inquiry 41(1). The Univer-
         sity of Chicago Press: 1–23.                        
       Chakrabarty, D. (2021). The Climate of History in a Planetary Age. University of Chicago Press.
       Chao, S. (2021). The Beetle or the Bug? Multispecies Politics in a West Papuan Oil Palm Plantation.
         American Anthropologist, 123(3), 476–489.           
       Charbonnier, P. (2017). A Genealogy of the Anthropocene. Annales Histoire Sciences Sociales, 72(2),
         201–228.                                            
       Charbonnier, P. (2020). Abondance et liberté: Une histoire environnementale des idées politiques. La
         Découverte.                                         
       Cotter, J. (2016). New Materialism and the Labor Theory of Value. The Minnesota Review, 2016(87),
         171–181.                                            
       Dalla Costa, M. (2012). Statement on ‘Women and the Subversion of the Community’ and Selma James’
         Sex, Race, and Class, the Perspective of Winning (2012). Available at: h t t p s : / / s t a t i c 1 . s q u a r e s p a c e . c o
         m / s t a t i c / 5 3 f 7 4 2 f e e 4 b 0 1 7 2 4 1 9 4 2 b d b e / t / 5 6 8 5 5 2 a 1 c 2 1 b 8 6 9 0 d 5 a 5 8 1 9 2 / 1 4 5 1 5 7 8 0 1 7 8 7 6 / M A R I A R O S
         A + D A L L A + C O S T A + - + S T A T E M E N T + O N + _ W O M E N + A N D + T H E + S U B V E R S I O N + O F + T H E +
         C O M M U N I T Y _ + A N D + S E L M A + J A M E S % E 2 % 8 0 % 9 9 + S E X + R A C E + A N D + C L A S S % 2 C + T H E +
         P E R S P E C T I V E + O F + W I N N I N G + % 2 8 2 0 1 2 % 2 9 . p d f (accessed 18 May 2023).
       Dalla Costa, M., & James, S. (1975). The Power of Women and the Subversion of the Community (3rd ed.).
         Falling Wall Press Ltd.                             
       Davis, H., & Todd, Z. (2017). On the Importance of a Date, or, Decolonizing the Anthropocene. ACME:
         an International Journal for Critical Geographies, 16(4), 4: 761–780.
       Fagan, M. (2019). On the Dangers of an Anthropocene Epoch: Geological Time, Political Time and Post-
         human Politics. Political Geography, 70, 55–63.     
       Federici, S. (2012). Counterplanning From the Kitchen. Revolution at point zero: Housework, Reproduc-
         tion, and feminist struggle (pp. 40–53). Oakland; Brooklyn.
       Federici, S. (2016). Our Struggle Will not Succeed Unless We Rebuild Society. Available at: (accessed 27
         July 2022). https://sur.conectas.org/en/silvia-federici/
       Federici, S. (2018). Silvia Federici Reflects on Wages for Housework. Available at: (accessed 20 July
         2022). h t t p s : / / w w w . n e w f r a m e . c o m / s i l v i a - f e d e r i c i - r e fl e c t s - w a g e s - h o u s e w o r k /
       Forrester, K. (2022). Feminist Demands and the Problem of Housework. American Political Science
         Review. Cambridge University Press: 1–15.           
       Foster, J. B. (2000). Marx’s Ecology: Materialism and Nature. Monthly Review.
       Foster, J. B., Clark, B., & York, R. (2011). The Ecological Rift: Capitalism’s War on the Earth. New York
         University.                                         
       Fraser, N. (2022). Cannibal Capitalism: How Our System is Devouring Democracy, Care, and the
         Planet—and what we can do about it. Verso.          
       Getachew, A. (2022). Political Theory in the Age of the Planetary - Dipesh Chakrabarty: The Climate of
         History in a Planetary Age. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021. Pp. 296.). The Review of
         Politics 84(4): 601–604.                            
       Hailwood, S. (2015). Alienation and Nature in Environmental Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
       Hallé, C., & Milon, A-S. (2020). The Infinity of the Anthropocene: A (Hi)story with a T housand Names.
         In B. Latour, & P. Weibel (Eds.), Critical zones: The science and politics of landing on Earth (pp.
         44–50). ZKM/Center for Art and Media.               
       Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Experimental Futures:
         Technological Lives, Scientific Arts, Anthropological V oices. Duke University Press.
       Hornborg, A. (2019). Nature, Society, and Justice in the Anthropocene: Unraveling the Money-Energy-
         Technology Complex. Cambridge University Press.     
       Hornborg, A. (2020). Dialectical Confusion: On Jason Moore’s Posthumanist Marxism. In: historical
         materialism. Available at: h t t p s : / / w w w . h i s t o r i c a l m a t e r i a l i s m . o r g / b l o g / d i a l e c t i c a l - c o n f u s i o n - j a s o n - m
         o o r e s - p o s t h u m a n i s t - m a r x i s m (accessed 26 October 2021).
       International Union of Geological Sciences (2024). The Anthropocene: IUGS-ICS Statement. Available
         at: h t t p s : / / w w w . i u g s . o r g / _ fi l e s / u g d / f 1 f c 0 7 _ 2 3 c 6 f 9 e 7 2 3 b c 4 7 b 9 b 5 f d c d 3 0 0 f 8 0 6 f 2 5 . p d f ? i n d e x = t r u e
         (accessed 12 September 2024).                       

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hybrid alienation: reproductive labour and emancipation in the… Page 19 of 19 16
       Jaeggi, R. (2006). Entfremdung: zur Aktualität eines sozialphilosophischen Problems: mit einem neuen
         Nachwort. Erste Auflage. Suhrkamp Taschenbuch Wissenschaft 2185. Berlin: Suhrkamp.
       Jaeggi, R. (2014). Alienation . Columbia University.  
       James, S. (2012). Sex, Race and Class: The Perspective of Winning: A Selection of Writings, 1952–2011.
         PM.                                                 
       James, S. (2022). Global Women’s Strike/ Wages for Housework/ Selma James. Available at: https:
         (accessed 28 June 2024).                            
       James, S., & Lopez, N. (2021). An income to care for people and planet in James, S. Our time is now: Sex,
         Race, Class, and caring for people and planet (1st ed., pp. 60–77). PM.
       Kallis, G., & Swyngedouw, E. (2017). Do Bees Produce Value? A Conversation Between an Ecological
         Economist and a Marxist Geographer. Capitalism Nature Socialism, 29(3), 36–50.
       Krzywoszynska, A. (2020). Nonhuman Labor and the Making of Resources: Making Soils a Resource
         Through Microbial Labor. Environmental Humanities, 12(1), 227–249.
       Latour, B. (2007). Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford University
         Press. Clarendon Lectures in Management Studies.    
       Latour, B. (2008). Politiques de la nature: Comment faire entrer les sciences en démocratie. Editions La
         Découverte.                                         
       Latour, B. (2010). Nous n’avons jamais été modernes: Essai d’anthropologie symétrique. Editions La
         Découverte.                                         
       Latour, B. (2022). Mémo sur la nouvelle classe écologique. Collection les empêcheurs de penser en Rond.
         Éditions La Découverte.                             
       Love, B. J. (2006). Feminists Who Changed America, 1963–1975. University of Illinois Press.
       Malm, A. (2018). Therogress of this Storm: Nature and Society in a Warming World. Verso Books.
       Malm, A. (2019). Against Hybridism: Why We Need to Distinguish between Nature and Society, Now
         More than Ever. Historical Materialism 27(2). Brill: 156–187.
       Mies, M. (2014). Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale: Women in the International Division of
         Labour. Zed Books. [New] edition.                   
       Mitman, G. (2019). Donna Haraway and Anna Tsing Reflect on the Plantationocene. Available at: h t t p s : / /
         e d g e e ff e c t s . n e t / h a r a w a y - t s i n g - p l a n t a t i o n o c e n e / (accessed 14 February 2023).
       Moore, J. W. (2015). Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of Capital. Verso
         Books.                                              
       Moore, J. W. (2016). Anthropocene or Capitalocene? Nature, History, and the Crisis of Capitalism. PM.
       Postone, M. (1996). Time, Labor, and Social Domination: A Reinterpretation of Marx’s Critical Theory.
         Cambridge University Press.                         
       Prescod, M., & Steele, N. (1980). Black Women: Bringing it All Back Home. Falling Wall.
       Saitō, K. (2017a). Karl Marx’s Ecosocialism: Capitalism, Nature, and t he Unfinished Critique of Political
         Economy. Monthly Review.                            
       Saitō, K. (2017b). Marx in the Anthropocene: Value, Metabolic Rift, and the Non-Cartesian Dualism.
         Zeitschrift für kritische Sozialtheorie und Philosophie 4(1–2). De Gruyter: 276–295.
       Saitō, K. (2023). Marx in the Anthropocene: Towards the Idea of Degrowth Communism. Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
       Skiveren, T. (2023). New Materialism and the Eco-Marxist Challenge: Ontological Shadowboxing in the
         Environmental Humanities. Environmental Humanities, 15(2), 181–194.
       Toupin, L. (2018). Wages for Housework: The History of an International Feminist Movement, 1972-77
         . Pluto.                                            
       Washick, B., Wingrove, E., Ferguson, K. E. (2015). Politics that Matter: Thinking About Power and Jus-
         tice w ith the New Materialists. Contemporary Political Theory 14(1). London, United Kingdom:
         Palgrave Macmillan: 63–89.                          
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Carl Pierer is a PhD candidate in politics and international studies at the University of Cambridge. His
       research interests include critical and feminist theory, environmental politics, political ecology and the
       history of political thought. Previous publications include ‘The Nature of Property: Locke and Labor in
       the Anthropocene’. Environmental Ethics. 46:1 (spring 2024): 27–45, and (with Felix Creutzig), ‘Star-
       shaped cities alleviate trade-off between climate change mitigation and adaptation’, Environ. Res. Lett.
       14: 085011.                                           