[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:729–748       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00752-1            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent 
       discussions of the relation between empirical social science
       and normative political theory                        
                                                             
                                                             
       Sune Lægaard1                                         
                                                             
       Accepted: 21 January 2025 / Published online: 20 March 2025
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Recent methodological debates about normative political theory have raised ques-
       tions about the relation between facts and values and between empirical social sci-
       ence and normative political theory. Jonathan Floyd’s normative behaviorism and
       Tariq Modood’s normative sociology are two prominent views about these relations.
       The two approaches see different kinds of social science facts as relevant. Floyd
       argues that behavioral patterns involving insurrection and crime are especially rel-
       evant as grounds for normative principles, whereas Modood argues that discussions
       of principles of multicultural equality should pay special attention to the expressed
       views of members of the minorities in question. The two approaches, furthermore,
       have different views of the nature of normativity and of the type of social science
       that is relevant to normative political theory. These differences show how such
       methodological differences have implications for what political theorists should do
       and which methods they should employ.                 
       Keywords Methodology · Normative behaviorism · Normative sociology ·
       Normativity · Political theory                        
                                                             
                                                             
       Political theory is having “a methodological moment” (Floyd, 2022). For two dec-
       ades, discussions about the relation between facts and principles, ideal and non-
       ideal theory, morality and politics, feasibility, and practice guidance, as well as the
       role of practices, institutions, and contexts in normative theorizing, have abounded.
       These discussions have not only concerned the correct theoretical understanding of
       what political theory is but have increasingly turned to the practical question about
       how political theory should be done. Most of these debates have not only tried to
       describe standard methods of political theory, such as reflective equilibrium. The
                                                             
       *                                                     
         Sune Lægaard                                        
         laegaard@ruc.dk                                     
       1 Roskilde University, M43R+78 Roskilde, Denmark      
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       730                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       tendency has rather been to challenge traditional conceptions of the methods of
       political theory, either on the grounds that they are thought problematic or because
       they do not capture the actual practices of much political theory. Either way, many
       versions of these methodological arguments have challenged many traditional ideas
       about normative theorizing.                           
         One recurring theme in many of these methodological debates concerns vari-
       ous versions of the question about whether and how facts are relevant to norma-
       tive theorizing. These debates can be seen as gradual departures from a traditional
       view of the relationship between empirical social science and normative political
       theory premised on a classical strict separation of facts and values. The tradi-
       tional view (e.g., Berlin, 2013; Grant, 2002) sees political theory as normative,
       evaluative, critical and as concerned with reasons, judgments, and interpretations.
       As such, it is humanistic (historical and philosophical) and concerned with the
       particular, whereas the social sciences are concerned with causes and general reg-
       ularities. Even though the study of politics needs to draw on both empirical social
       science and normative political theory, there is in principle a strict distinction
       between the empirical and the normative, which are “complementary” (Grant,
       2002, p. 590).                                        
         This traditional view of the relation between the normative and the empirical has
       been challenged for some time. From the empirical side of the traditional distinc-
       tion, Gerring and Yesnowitz (2006) argued that normative political philosophy is a
       necessary component of a relevant and useful political science. From the normative
       side, Rainer Bauböck (2008) described how the actual practice of much political
       theory since the 1990s changed away from the traditional picture, when institution-
       alist and contextualist approaches led political theorists to incorporate comparative
       and historical studies.                               
         Following these and similar challenges to the traditional view (summarized in
       Dowding, 2020), methodological debates about normative political theory have
       more recently turned to examining how political theorists actually use empirical
       data in their normative arguments (Perez, 2020) and sketching different roles for
       use of empirical data in political theory (Perez, 2024). However, the rejection of the
       traditional view opens several big questions that have not been systematically dis-
       cussed yet. These concern the precise relation between the empirical and the norma-
       tive, including precisely which empirical data are relevant and what different views
       concerning this imply for the kind of normative arguments that can be articulated on
       this basis.                                           
         This article focuses on two views about this complex issue that have been pro-
       posed recently, namely “normative behaviorism” as set out by Jonathan Floyd (2017,
       2020, 2023) and “normative sociology” as suggested by Tariq Modood (2019,
       2022). There are several reasons for focusing on these two views and for discuss-
       ing them together. Both normative behaviorism and normative sociology distance
       themselves from the noted classical strict separation of facts and values in politi-
       cal theory. Both approaches hold that there is a positive relation between norma-
       tive political theory and empirical social science. This is in both cases articulated in
       the labels that Floyd and Modood respectively use to name their approaches, which
       explicitly link the normative and social science.     

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 731
                                                             
         A further reason for looking at these two approaches together is that, while they
       at first glance look related in the noted ways, on closer inspection there turns out to
       be substantial differences between them. Comparing the two approaches is, there-
       fore, a way of investigating what the relation between empirical social science and
       normative political theory might be. The comparison is furthermore a way of identi-
       fying distinctive features of the two approaches that might not be apparent were they
       considered in isolation. This article will accordingly discuss the two approaches as
       articulations of different types of views of the relation between the empirical and the
       normative. The broader relevance of this comparison is that it shows how different
       views about this relation, where normative behaviorism and normative sociology are
       here just two examples, have implications for how political theorists should work.
       The main findings are that the two approaches not only see quite different facts (and
       related empirical data) as relevant to normative argument; they also have radically
       different ideas about how these facts are related to normativity and where the nor-
       mativity of political theory comes from, to begin with. The broader implications of
       these differences are that the two views turn out to rely on quite different types of
       social science and related social ontologies, which means that, if one accepts their
       view of how facts and values are linked, political theorists should do quite different
       things and employ very different methods.             
         In the following when I talk about “facts” and “values,” I really mean “descrip-
       tive” or “empirical statements” and “normative statements,” respectively.1 I assume
       a version of the is/ought or descriptive/evaluative distinction in the simple sense that
       descriptive and evaluative statements say something different.
         This article first provides very brief presentations of normative behaviorism and
       normative sociology. I then proceed to compare the two approaches in four respects:
       (1) What are the relevant facts? Which kinds of empirical data?
       (2) What is the source of normativity?                
       (3) What is the scope and granularity of the resulting normative judgments?
       (4) What is the “direction of fit” between facts and values?
       I end by considering what the comparison of the two views in these respects tell
       us about the two approaches and what the differences imply for how to do political
       theory.                                               
                                                             
       Normative behaviorism and normative sociology         
                                                             
       The background for Floyd’s normative behaviorism is, first, his assumption that
       political philosophy is concerned with providing compelling and determinate
       answers to the question “how should we live?” (2017, Chap. 1), and second, his
       argument that political philosophy has traditionally tried to answer this question by
                                                             
       1 As noted by Floyd (2017, p. 170, fn 3), cf. Dodd and Stern-Gillet (1995) and De Vries and Gordijn
       (2009), there is a difference between the fact/value distinction, the is/ought distinction and the naturalis-
       tic fallacy.                                          
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       732                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       appealing to what people think, i.e., within what he labels “mentalism.” This is a
       label for the view that political philosophy consists in seeking to derive convincing
       and meaningful political principles from patterns in our normative thoughts, e.g.,
       by consulting “intuitions” or “considered judgements.” Floyd argues that mentalism
       can never provide a satisfactory answer to the question because the thoughts it tries
       to turn into principles are too inconsistent both within and between different indi-
       viduals (2017, Chap. 2).                              
         For present purposes I will not go into either of these assumptions. My focus is
       rather on the alternative to mentalism that Floyd proposes, namely, what he calls
       “normative behaviorism,” and what this view implies regarding the role of social-
       scientific facts in normative arguments.              
         The central claim of normative behaviorism is that facts about actual behavior
       can ground the answer to the normative question about how we should live in a way
       mentalism cannot. Floyd argues that the relevant categories of behavior to examine
       concern crime and insurrection. The reason for this is that these kinds of behavior
       are particularly risky for people to engage in, so one can assume that such behavior
       expresses strong dissatisfaction with the regime under which they live. More specifi-
       cally, Floyd argues that crime is a symptom of inequality, and that insurrection is a
       symptom of insufficient liberal democratic institutions.
         Floyd finally argues that, if one proceeds along these lines, one has a strong case
       for what he calls “social-liberal-democracy.” Roughly, Floyd’s argument is that the
       relevant social science data show that people consistently prefer living under more
       liberal democratic and more egalitarian regimes.      
         One can discuss the assumptions underlying Floyd’s argument, both with respect
       to the focus on crime and insurrection and with respect to the argument for “social-
       liberal-democracy” that he mounts on this basis. One might for instance accept his
       general idea of basing answers to political theory’s central question about how we
       should live on behavioral evidence but reject his specific claims about what counts
       as good evidence, or his further argument about what this evidence shows. I will not
       engage directly with these first-order normative discussions here.2 I will rather focus
       on what normative behaviorism implies regarding the methodological questions
       about the relation between normative political theory and empirical social science.
         Tariq Modood (2019) initially presented the notion of “normative sociology” as
       a label for the kind of work he himself has been doing on a range of issues related to
       multiculturalism over several decades, which has elsewhere been described as part
       of “the Bristol School of Multiculturalism” (Levey, 2019). While his focus is on
       multiculturalism, Modood clearly thinks of normative sociology as a broader type
       of methodological approach that could in principle be adopted and be appropriate
       in relation to other contested social and political issues. Modood initially described
       his approach as “a hybrid of normative political theory and empirical political soci-
       ology,” where the sociological concepts used are “normatively informed by my
       2 There are already several discussions of normative behaviorism which go into these and other issues,
       e.g., Baderin (2023), Dowding (2023), Erman and Möller (2023), Miller (2023), Modood (2023), Perez
       (2023), Stevens (2023).                               
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 733
                                                             
       conceptual framework, which itself is developed by drawing out normative ‘isms’
       which are partly present in the political contexts I am interested in.” (2019, p. 17)
       He has subsequently given a more general characterization of normative sociology,
       stressing that it should not only offer negative deconstructive criticism of sociologi-
       cally identified norms and practices but should also provide positive constructive
       proposals for improvement (2022). Because of his focus on multiculturalism issues,
       improvement has been oriented towards inclusion of minorities.
         Normative sociology “Looks for norms and political goals that are operative in
       a sociopolitical phenomenon and their discursive representation and contestation”
       (Modood, 2022, p. 2). Contestation is central to Modood’s work, which is focused
       on “contestation-laden socio-political phenomena” (Modood, 2023, p. 464) and
       takes its point of departure in minority claims-making (cf. Levey, 2019). Modood
       has elsewhere characterized his approach by saying that “The objects of analysis are
       typically a political conflict or controversy” (Modood, 2019, p. 17), in relation to
       which he begins “not just with phenomena, but phenomena characterised as ‘nega-
       tive’, such as exclusion (and so clearly some normative standard is already at work)
       and which can and should be made inclusive. I point to social facts suggesting how,
       as it were, the positive is struggling to be born or stay alive” (Modood, 2019, p. 18).
       I will not go into Modood’s substantive views about multiculturalism, e.g., his argu-
       ment that Islamophobia is a form of cultural racism, but focus on the methodologi-
       cal aspect of normative sociology.                    
         The most elaborate description of the methodological aspects of normative
       sociology are found in Modood and Simon Thompson’s defense of a contextual
       approach to political theory which they call “iterative contextualism,” according
       to which it is through the exploration and evaluation of multiple contexts that gen-
       eral normative principles are devised, revised, and refined (Modood & Thompson,
       2018). Modood’s description of normative sociology invokes iterative contextualism
       as the method through which normative sociology should establish the normative
       principles that subsequently should guide sociological inquiry.
         These sketches of normative behaviorism and normative sociology show that
       both approaches are alternatives to the traditional view about the strict separation
       of the normative and the descriptive. In the following, I will investigate what these
       kinds of alternative approaches more precisely imply regarding the questions noted
       in the beginning. Given that both approaches envisage a link between social science
       and normative political theorizing, I will first focus on which social-scientific facts
       the two approaches see as relevant. Given that the two approaches both see a link
       between such facts and normative argument, I will then look at their views about
       normativity and what they imply concerning the scope of the normative judgments
       that the two approaches can make on this basis. Finally, I will consider the overall
       question about the relation between the normative and the descriptive in the two
       approaches. I only discuss the two approaches in relation to these questions about
       the relation between normative political theory and empirical social science. Even if
       there are other issues to discuss, and even if the approaches face problems in other
       respects, they are instances of types of approaches to the relation between normative
       political theory and social science that are relevant to consider with respect to these
       methodological issues.                                

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       734                                       S. Lægaard  
       What are the relevant facts? Which kinds of empirical data?
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative behaviorism is quite specific regarding which kinds of social facts are
       relevant to political theory and why. According to Floyd, the relevant facts are facts
       about crime and insurrection. The types of data to measure these facts are also well
       defined, since Floyd mentions specific types of data, such as the Polity, ACLP, or
       Freedom House datasets, as measures of insurrection (2017, p. 186), and various
       criminological studies as measures of crime (2017, p. 191).
         The reason why precisely crime and insurrection are the relevant facts is that
       these patterns of behavior reveal or express political preferences about the political
       regime and the type of society (2017, p. 168). More specifically, insurrection and
       crime can be viewed as “a rejection of the political principles currently governing
       the individual undertaking the action. On this way of doing things, actions function
       as verdicts on the political system that produces them” (Floyd, 2020, p. 139).
         The reason why it is crime and insurrection rather than other forms of behavior
       that should be singled out as a basis for arguments about political theory’s central
       question about how we should live is that “these two behaviours are united by both
       the level of personal risk they tend to involve, and the fact that people tend only to
       partake of them when they find their current lives, which lack goods x, y, and z,
       unbearable” (Floyd, 2017, pp. 168–169, cf. Floyd, 2020, p. 140). Because of this,
       what might be thought of as the epistemic value of crime and insurrection is higher
       and more reliable than that of other forms of behavior; crime and insurrection are
       better expressions of political preferences than other forms of behavior.
         Normative sociology is less specific and potentially much broader in its view of
       which facts are relevant. Modood mentions facts about quite different social phe-
       nomena, e.g., work on employment and on entry into higher education (Modood,
       2022, p. 3), but these are clearly just illustrations. In light of Modood’s focus on
       minority claims-making and contestation of norms and political goals that are
       operative in a sociopolitical phenomenon, it seems that the relevant social facts for
       Modood’s normative sociology are defined in terms of how they are related to politi-
       cally contested issues, especially issues being contested by minorities, and in terms
       of how they potentially can be linked to a change from exclusion to inclusion of
       these minorities, i.e., relative to a positive development measured on the basis of an
       ideal of inclusive citizenship.                       
         At the level of which data should then be used, this kind of approach gives a
       special place to the views of the minorities in question. There are many examples
       of this in Modood’s work. For instance, in relation to the discussion of issues con-
       cerning religion, Modood seeks to give voice to and gives priority to the views of
       Muslims (and other religious minorities). In the discussion of Muslim headscarves,
       for instance, political theory should seek evidence from Muslim women and give
       special weight to their perspective. Modood similarly argues that the legitimacy of
       Anglican establishment should not be discussed on the basis of a theoretical crite-
       rion of, for example, alienation of minorities, but should be attentive to and give
       special weight to the expressed views of British Muslims about establishment
       (Modood, 2019, p. 13).                                

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 735
                                                             
         This brief sketch is sufficient to make some comparisons between normative
       behaviorism and normative sociology. The two approaches are clearly concerned
       with different questions, normative behaviorism with general questions about
       the type of regime and normative sociology with more policy-oriented discus-
       sions of specific laws and institutions, which makes a difference for the facts and
       data in question. But there is some commonality between them in how they base
       their views about relevant facts and data on what might be called their expressive
       value. Floyd is concerned with crime and insurrection because he assumes that
       crime and insurrection express preferences in the sense that they are the best indi-
       cators of the political preferences of a population regarding the political system
       under which they live. Modood is concerned with the expressed views of Mus-
       lims and other religious minorities regarding regulation of religious dress and
       religious institutions because he seeks to articulate a political theory case on the
       basis of the political claims making of religious minorities.
         Despite the similarity in the focus on expressions, there are more important
       differences. One is in the scope of the groups whose preferences the facts are sup-
       posed to be expressions of; here, Floyd focuses on whole populations of societies
       and Modood on more delimited minority groups within a given society. I’ll return
       to the scope issue later.                             
         The other difference is more methodological. While Modood’s interest in con-
       crete social science facts and expressions of political preferences is similar to
       Floyd’s, the crucial difference concerns the sense in and extent to which Floyd
       is actually a behaviorist. Floyd is explicitly (2017, pp. 210–211) not committed
       to so-called psychological or philosophical behaviorism holding the strong onto-
       logical and semantic claims that psychology is not about inner experiences at all
       but only about observable behavior and that any claims about psychological expe-
       riences should either be eliminated and replaced by behavioral terms or trans-
       lated without remainder into behavioral concepts (Graham, 2023). He also does
       not hold the strong version of the methodological and explanatory claims nor-
       mally associated with behaviorism, namely that one should only study observable
       behavior and that the only explanatory relations are between observable stimuli
       and responses. While not being committed to these general claims, Floyd is nev-
       ertheless committed to more specific epistemic claims that (a) political prefer-
       ences cannot reliably be known by attending to what philosophers think or what
       people say (due to his criticism of mentalism), (b) that crime and insurrection
       are sufficiently reliable evidence for claims about political preferences, and (c)
       that crime and insurrection are likely the best forms of behavioral evidence about
       political preferences (due to the level of risk they involve). The practical upshot
       of these epistemic claims is that, while Floyd does not deny the existence or rel-
       evance of inner psychological experiences, such as political preferences, they
       can only be reliably known through observable behavior, and while he actually
       assumes some form of universal human psychological set-up that underpins the
       behavioral responses by large populations, the only reliable way of explaining the
       resulting political preferences is by studying the observable relations between the
       type of political regimes under which people live and how they react in terms of
       crime and insurrection.                               

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       736                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
         In Floyd’s terms, it seems that Modood is still a mentalist in the sense that he
       cannot accept these epistemic claims. While Modood is interested in behavior—
       his original entry into debates about multiculturalism was for instance very much
       motivated by how Muslims reacted to Salman Rushdie’s novel Satanic Verses—he
       explicitly seeks to give voice to minorities, not figuratively speaking, but literally.
       He argues that political theory about multiculturalism should listen to what rep-
       resentatives of the minorities in question say. Modood is interested in the politi-
       cal preferences of minorities, but he assumes that one way of knowing these is by
       attending to statements of representatives and members of minority groups. Modood
       does not at all deny that behavior is important, but he allows a much broader range
       of behavior as potentially relevant. So not only must Modood reject Floyd’s first
       epistemic claim, i.e., the criticism of mentalism, he must also reject Floyd’s third
       epistemic claim, namely the claim that only forms of behavior involving high per-
       sonal risk can be a reliable indicator of political preferences. Finally, Modood ques-
       tions Floyd’s second claim about the empirical relations between crime and insur-
       rection and social-liberal-democracy (Modood, 2023, p. 463).
         The upshot of this comparison, therefore, is that, to the extent that one accepts the
       negative epistemic claims central to Floyd’s normative behaviorism, this will rule
       out the central elements of Modood’s normative sociology, at least as he has him-
       self practiced this in relation to multiculturalism. Conversely, to the extent that one
       agrees with Modood’s way of studying multiculturalism, one must reject Floyd’s
       negative epistemic claims.                            
         This comparison furthermore points to another difference. Whereas both Floyd
       and Modood are interested in expressions of preferences, although they disagree
       about what can function as a reliable expression, the reasons why they are inter-
       ested in expressions are partly different. As already noted, Floyd’s argument is epis-
       temic in the sense that his focus on crime and insurrection is purely motivated by his
       assumptions about what can function as reliable evidence for political preferences
       regarding regime type. Modood’s argument, although it does of course have an epis-
       temic aspect, is primarily motivated on normative grounds, since he is concerned
       with representing minority claims making. Modood further argues that attention to
       the context, which includes the concern with the expressed preferences of minori-
       ties, provides important considerations which must be borne in mind when seek-
       ing to reach an all-things-considered judgment about what should be done in each
       particular situation (Modood & Thompson, 2018, p 351). These considerations take
       the form of constraints that limit normative judgments based on considerations of
       feasibility and how we can reasonably expect people to behave and to change the
       way they behave.                                      
         But Modood does not only think that context provides negative reasons against
       normative judgments that might not be feasible or practicable; he also holds that
       context provides positive reasons for certain normative judgments. This is because
       he gives particular consideration to the ideals and values that the people in a given
       context presently endorse as ideals in their own right (Modood & Thompson, 2018,
       p. 352). So Modood’s normative sociology assumes that there are independent
       normative reasons for taking the norms, values, and preferences of minorities into
       account when making normative judgments.              

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 737
       What is the source of normativity?                    
                                                             
                                                             
       The first question concerned the social-scientific facts that normative behavior-
       ism and normative sociology take to be relevant. Both views take such facts to
       be relevant to the normative concerns of political theory. So, the next respect in
       which to examine and compare normative behaviorism and normative sociology
       concerns their view of normativity. More specifically, how does normativity enter
       the picture on these two views and where does it come from? What is their view
       of the relation between social facts and normativity? 
         Normative behaviorism, as already discussed, focuses on behavior as a signal
       of strong political preferences. Floyd holds that “political principles are justified
       by what I call expressed political preferences. These preferences are normative
       preferences that get revealed by certain patterns of behaviour, as opposed to nor-
       mative preferences that get revealed through certain patterns of thought” (2017,
       p. 168, cf. 2020, p. 137). Floyd assumes that one can “‘read off’ normativity from
       behaviour by reading off the political preferences expressed by the behaviour of
       large groups of people over long periods of time” (2017, p. 242).
         Floyd readily acknowledges that this means that normative behaviorism makes
       an is-to-ought inference, “by moving from the ‘is’ of how people behave under
       different institutions, and thus, in response to the principles those institutions rep-
       resent, to an ‘ought’ of what principles we ought to adopt.” (2020, p. 142) This
       clearly raises the challenge concerning how the theory “can go from an ‘is’ to an
       ‘ought’ in the manner described. Or, taking a different angle, whether we could
       ever move from social-scientific ‘facts’ to political ‘principles’” (Floyd, 2023, p.
       366).                                                 
         Floyd’s response to this acknowledged challenge is basically to argue that nor-
       mative behaviorism is no different from traditional mentalist political philosophy,
       which also moves from “is” to “ought.” According to Floyd, the only difference
       is that where the facts making up the “is” for normative behaviorism concern
       actions, the facts making up the “is” for traditional mentalist political philosophy
       concern thoughts: “mentalism assumes that we can perfectly easily move from
       thoughts to principles—whether those thoughts be impartial choices, judgements,
       or intuitions—and so assumes that there is no implied violation of that concept
       which has overshadowed so much of twentieth- and now twenty-first-century
       philosophy—the ‘naturalistic fallacy’. Why, though, should this fallacy apply to
       actions if it does not apply to thoughts?” (2017, p. 170) Floyd even suggests that
       “we could now quite easily talk of the mentalistic fallacy, if it is true not only (1)
       that conventional political philosophy relies upon a certain class of facts, but also
       (2) that it is, therefore, confronted with the naturalistic fallacy, as it tries to move
       from mental ‘is’ to political ‘ought’, when it had thought itself exempt from such
       confrontation” (2020, p. 150, cf. 2023, p. 367).      
         I will return to the is-to-ought inference in a moment. But before that it is
       important to note that, even if one grants Floyd’s response to the challenge, i.e.,
       his claim that what he calls mentalism also moves from an “is” to an “ought,” this
       still does not really answer the question about how normativity enters along the

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       738                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       way. At best, it only shows that normative behaviorism and mentalism face the
       same challenge. It is still a further question how, if we start out with descriptive
       claims about facts, we get to normative claims about principles.
         Floyd ends up answering this question about normative force (2017, p. 172)
       by affirming a Humean position according to which “reasons are subordinate to,
       because necessarily derived from, our preexisting motivations” (2017, p. 175).
       The normative force of principles then can be understood in terms of a contingent
       imperative: “It is a contingent imperative just insofar as it claims ‘given that you
       have set of preferences x, you should adopt or support or accept set of principles
       y’” (2017, p. 176).                                   
         While this provides an answer to the question about the source of normativ-
       ity, mentalists can provide a similar answer, which derives normative force from
       thoughts rather than actions as indicators of preexisting motivations. Floyd’s
       argument for preferring the behaviorist over the mentalist answer is that there is
       much less consistency between thoughts than between actions.
         At this point, it is worth considering in some more detail, how the normative
       behaviorist move from “is” to “ought” proceeds and precisely when during this
       move the normative force in the conclusion comes in. One might reconstruct the
       normative behaviorist argument as having the following form:
       (1) Assumption: Behavior of type B expresses political preferences P about institu-
          tions I                                            
          [behaviorist epistemic assumptions]                
       (2) Descriptive social science facts: (Large numbers of) people (over long periods
          of time) behave in way B                           
          [measures of crime and insurrection]               
       (3) Descriptive social science facts: Behavior B is systematically linked to institu-
          tions I                                            
          [social-liberal-democracy]                         
       (4) From 1 to 3: Descriptive conclusion: (Large numbers of) people (over long
          periods of time) have preference P about institutions I
          [people in fact prefer social-liberal-democracy]   
       (5) Interpretative claim: Institutions I express political principles PP
          [social-liberal-democratic principles]             
       (6) Assumption: If one prefers institution I, then one has a contingent reason R to
          accept political principles PP expressed by institution I
          [Humean account of reasons]                        
       (7) From 4 to 6: Normative conclusion: People have contingent reason R to accept
          political principles PP                            
       Normative behaviorism seeks to justify normative political principles about how
       we should live and, more specifically, which type of political system we should
       have. The argument as sketched makes clear that these principles are based on the
       purely descriptive claim that people in fact prefer social-liberal-democratic insti-
       tutions, but that this only gets normative force when combined with the Humean
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 739
                                                             
       account of reasons (for criticism of this move, see Dowding, 2023, and Erman &
       Möller, 2023). The argument sketched here also makes clear that the conclusion
       only becomes one about principles because of the interpretative claim that certain
       institutions express specific political principles.   
         It is worth pausing to consider this for two reasons. One is that Floyd is not
       interested in simply summarizing the existing political science and criminology
       studies; he is interested in making a further claim that is not just about behav-
       ior and institutions but about political principles. So, the claim is not simply the
       factual one that people prefer certain institutions but the normative one that they
       have reason to accept certain principles. One can only get from the descriptive
       claim about behavior relative to institutions to the normative claim about reasons
       to accept principles if there is a way of linking principles to institutions. This link
       is provided by the interpretative claim (5) in the argument sketched above.
         But what are the principles expressed by social-liberal-democratic institutions?
       One easy way of answering this question might seem to be that these principles
       simply say something like “have social-liberal-democratic institutions.” However,
       this is not terribly helpful, for political principles are precisely supposed to pro-
       vide us with some criterion that tells us which institutions we should seek to real-
       ize. Floyd’s initial answer to this question seems to be that the content of the
       principles is settled by the institutions that people in fact prefer, since he notes
       that “social-liberal-democracy” simply is a label for the institutions that “do best,
       empirically, in accordance with the criteria already laid down” (2017, p. 197)
       rather than a substantive account of what it takes for an institution to be social-
       liberal-democratic. This empirical answer might be defensible as an answer to a
       question about what “social-liberal-democracy” means as a descriptive category.
       Then social-liberal-democracy is simply a label for institutions that have low
       rates of crime and insurrection.                      
         But Floyd’s empirical answer cannot serve as an answer to the further question
       about which political principles are expressed by these institutions. The reason for
       this is that we then collapse the distinction between institutions and principles. Floyd
       wants his version of the argument to show not only that people prefer certain institu-
       tions (4) but that they have reason to accept social-liberal-democratic principles (7),
       so he must be able to say what the social-liberal-democratic principles expressed by
       social-liberal-democratic institutions are. The problem here is that there are many
       different articulations of what the principles expressed by social-liberal-institutions
       are. Even if we accept Floyd’s claim that rates of crime express a political preference
       for less unequal regimes, this is compatible with several different forms of egalitar-
       ian principles (e.g., strict egalitarianism, luck egalitarianism, equality of resources,
       welfare, or capabilities etc.) as well as maximin principles, and arguably even some
       forms of sufficientarianism and utilitarianism. Even if we accept Floyd’s claim that
       rates of insurrection express a political preference for democratic regimes with pro-
       tection of individual liberties, this is compatible with many different accounts of
       democratic principles (procedural, deliberative, presidential or parliamentarian, with
       or without judicial review, etc.) and quite different accounts of the nature and extent
       of individual liberties (e.g., whether freedom of expression allows regulation of hate
       speech or not, how private property can be regulated and limited, etc.).

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       740                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
         Floyd spends quite some time providing possible explanations for why social-
       liberal-democratic institutions fare better in terms of crime and insurrection (2017,
       pp. 198–210) and reasons why different groups of people should be convinced by
       his case in favor of social-liberal-democracy (2017, pp. 229–237). But these expla-
       nations and reasons do not provide an answer to the question about which political
       principles are expressed by institutions labeled social-liberal-democratic. So there is
       arguably what might be called a normative determinacy problem facing Floyd’s nor-
       mative behaviorism that is distinct from the challenges he in fact discusses, namely
       how we get specific content to the political principles that he wants his type of argu-
       ment to justify.                                      
         Just as normative behaviorism gets normativity from the social science account
       of people’s actual behavior (together with the noted Humean account of reasons),
       Modood’s normative sociology similarly gets normativity from its account of the
       contexts it engages with. More specifically, Modood and Thompson’s iterative con-
       textualist account of how political theory should go from description and interpreta-
       tion of specific contexts to general normative principles takes its point of departure
       in the norms and values established in a given context, which are then interpreted
       and formulated as general principles by the political theorist. They illustrate this by
       the example of hate-speech laws, where iterative contextualism would start out by
       interpreting the reasons for such a law in a specific state, articulate a principle justi-
       fying hate-speech laws on this basis, and then apply this principle to similar laws in
       other jurisdictions to test and refine it. So iterative contextualism is partly a systema-
       tization of normative commitments already in place in these contexts.
         But Modood and Thompson furthermore address the question about the source
       of normativity and the relation between normative and descriptive. They understand
       contexts as what they call “normative practices,” by which they mean “networks of
       norms strongly associated with particular sets of practices” (Modood & Thompson,
       2018, p. 344). This makes clear that the normative is already “in” the contexts that
       are studied in the form of norms that inform peoples’ understanding of goods, insti-
       tutions, and relationships. Modood and Thompson state that “by connecting norms
       to practices in this way we can avoid the error of assuming that it is possible to infer
       principles of justice directly from value-free accounts of contexts. Since such con-
       texts are necessarily normative in character, they are not logically different in kind
       from the principles which we believe should regulate them” (2018, p. 345).
         Modood, thus, explicitly engages with potential objections to normative sociol-
       ogy based on the classical distinction between normative and descriptive, just as
       Floyd explicitly addresses possible charges against normative behaviorism for being
       guilty of committing naturalistic fallacies. This is one respect in which the two
       approaches are similar; they both acknowledge that what they propose can be seen
       as violations of fact/value distinctions in some sense. However, their responses to
       these envisaged objections are different. Where Floyd explicitly admits that norma-
       tive behaviorism infers “ought” from “is” and in this sense bites the bullet, Modood
       and Thompson claim that normativity was really there all along. Iterative contextu-
       alism might be said to infer “ought” from “ought”—or, rather, to interpret and sys-
       tematize normative commitments already present in a given practice. So, where nor-
       mative behaviorism challenges the strict separation of facts and values head on and

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 741
                                                             
       questions whether it would be a problem if it were guilty of something like a natu-
       ralistic fallacy, normative sociology rather denies that it makes an inference from
       “is” to “ought” at all. While this might initially look like a stark difference between
       normative behaviorism and normative sociology, it is not as stark as it seems. This
       is because, as discussed previously, normative behaviorism does not really go from
       “is” to “ought” just like that. Rather, normativity only enters the normative behav-
       iorist picture in virtue of the assumed Humean account of reasons.
         However, there is still a difference between the view of normativity in norma-
       tive behaviorism and in normative sociology, the latter as cashed out in the form of
       iterative contextualism. The Humean account of reasons in normative behaviorism
       is a fundamental account of what reasons are and, thus, where normativity comes
       from. There is no normativity in the social-scientific account of peoples’ actual
       behavior that forms the first part of the normative behaviorist argument as sketched
       above. This social-scientific part of the argument (1–4) only deals in facts about
       actual behavior and facts about the preferences this behavior expresses. The norma-
       tive sociology picture is fundamentally different. Here, the context is from the outset
       understood and characterized in terms of norms. This also means that there is no
       need, and arguably no room, for an account of normativity like the Humean one in
       normative sociology.                                  
         Another way of saying this is that, while the two approaches both see social sci-
       ence as relevant to normative political theory, they have two fundamentally different
       forms of social science in mind, which assume two fundamentally different ontolo-
       gies. While Floyd does not subscribe to psychological behaviorism as the view that
       rejects the existence of mental states, they play no practical role for the social sci-
       ence on which normative behaviorism relies (2017, pp. 210–211). For epistemic rea-
       sons, normative behaviorism sees social reality as made up by the observable behav-
       ior of people. Floyd also allows for institutions as part of social reality, but mainly
       as independent variables that can contribute to the explanation of changes in observ-
       able behavior (2017, pp. 216–217), just as he allows an explanatory role of cultures,
       but again mainly as intermediary mechanisms between institutions and observable
       behavior (2017, pp 219–220). Modood rather sees the contexts making up social
       reality as necessarily normative and value-laden practices. This is a view of social
       reality as already normative, and one where the normativity in question is essential
       for understanding the social contexts in question. One might say that, while norma-
       tive behaviorism and normative sociology both take social science to be indispen-
       sable to normative theorizing, they rely on social science from two fundamentally
       different social-scientific paradigms.                
       Scope and granularity                                 
       Even if one accepts, even just for the sake of argument, Floyd’s assumptions regard-
       ing crime and insurrection as particularly salient forms of behavior (see Stevens,
       2023 for criticism of the reliance on these types of data), and even if one accepts
       the further elements of his argument for social-liberal-democracy on this basis, it is
       worth noting that Floyd’s version of normative behaviorism has a specific scope and
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       742                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       what one might call granularity (cf. Baderin, 2023, pp. 479–480). On Floyd’s own
       assumption, crime and insurrection are salient forms of behavior in relation to the
       type of regime in place at the state level. Crime relates to the amount of inequality
       in society measured at the state level, rather, e.g., than at the global or local levels.
       Insurrection relates to how state institutions are liberal democratic rather than, e.g.,
       how the global order allows participation and engagement, or how local government
       runs local institutions. So Floyd’s brand of normative behaviorism can, on its own
       assumptions, only ground judgments about the regime type at the state level. It is a
       state-centric idea which, therefore, has a limited (national) scope (Floyd, 2016 con-
       siders this problem in relation to extension to the international system).
         Regarding granularity, Floyd seems to assume that normative behaviorism is
       not only limited to arguing the preferability of social-liberal-democracy over other
       forms of regimes but could also say something about the relative preferability of
       different policies and institutions within social-liberal-democracy, if only social sci-
       entists could come up with sufficiently fine-grained data (2017, p. 182). The idea,
       it seems, would be that one could, at least in principle, compare different social-
       liberal-democracies by looking at the different behaviors exhibited by people living
       under them and linking these to how they differ at the level of specific policies or
       institutions.                                         
         But this is arguably not simply a matter of sufficiently detailed data. Given that
       the data on which normative behaviorism relies, crime and insurrection, are gen-
       eral measures calculated at the national level, and given that crime and insurrection
       are assumed to be uniquely significant precisely as responses to the general type of
       regime, it seems that normative behaviorism, on its own assumptions, cannot say
       anything about more specific (sub-regime) political measures, policies, laws, institu-
       tions, or agents.                                     
         If this is correct, then normative behaviorism will only provide a methodology for
       a limited part of political philosophy, namely the one concerned with regime types
       at the state level. This is of course an important and classic issue in political phi-
       losophy. But it is far from the only one. Much political philosophy, especially of the
       more applied kinds, has focused on specific policies, e.g., policies about the regula-
       tion of franchise, free speech, education, or taxation, or specific types of institutions
       within a social-liberal-democracy, e.g., citizens’ assemblies, political parties, private
       schools, or religious communities. If this is not just a question about sufficient data
       but is rather a matter of the fundamental methodological assumption on which nor-
       mative behaviorism is based, namely that only behaviors like crime and insurrection
       are reliable indicators of political preferences, and that these preferences concern
       fundamental conditions related to types of regimes, it is hard to see how norma-
       tive behaviorism can be developed to provide a methodology for more fine-grained
       forms of political philosophy. This would require being able to say which parts of
       crime and insurrection, or their relative absence, are responses to particular policies
       or particular institutions, or their absence. The only way of doing this would seem
       to be if two societies were exactly alike, including in terms of the people living in
       them, in all respects except one specific law or institution.
         Turning to normative sociology, Modood and Thompson note that the norma-
       tive practices on which iterative contextualism focuses “may range considerably in

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 743
                                                             
       size and scale, including the legal, political or educational system of a particular
       state, and the culture of a specific group of people or of a particular organization
       within that state” and that “normative practices also exist at regional and global lev-
       els above individual states” (Modood & Thompson, 2018, p. 345). While Modood
       has generally worked on national contexts and the examples of contexts provided
       are also national, it seems that what matters to normative sociology is that one can
       identify a practice. If this is to be amenable to the iterative contextualist method of
       discussion, a further requirement is that it must be possible to identify additional
       practices of a similar type. This is required since iterative contextualism takes politi-
       cal principles articulated on the basis of investigation of one context and applies
       these principles to a similar practice in a new context in order to test and potentially
       further develop the principles in question.           
         Iterative contextualism only works if it is possible to determine that the additional
       practices are in fact of the same type so that the articulated principles are principles
       for the regulation of this kind of practice. This requirement raises some problems for
       iterative contextualism, since it only makes sense to apply a principle and potentially
       revise it in light of how it relates to norms in a new context, if the general principle
       and the contextual norms are indeed about the same kind of practice. This means
       that there is always a choice between revising a principle in light of a contextual
       norm or deciding that the new practice is really not an instance of the type of prac-
       tice that the principle is supposed to regulate (Lægaard, 2019, pp. 965–968). Nor-
       mative sociology, thus, faces its own version of a normative determinacy problem,
       since it is arguably always an open question whether a new practice falls within the
       scope of the principle it considers, in which case the application of the principle
       to the new practice might result in adjustment of the content of the principle, or
       whether the new practice falls outside the scope of the principle. This problem for
       iterative contextualism is in principle independent of the type of scope problem fac-
       ing normative behaviorism since the fact that a law or institution is at the national
       level does not settle whether it is of the same type as another law or institution in
       another national context. Normative sociology employing an iterative contextualist
       methodology, therefore, seems not to be limited in principle to the national level in
       the same way that normative behaviorism seems to be, but it does face a problem
       similar to the normative determinacy problem facing the latter.
       “Direction of fit” between facts and values           
       Normative behaviorism and normative sociology both take social science to be cru-
       cial to normative political theorizing, but as shown they have different ideas about
       both what normativity is and what kind of social science is relevant. But there turns
       out to be an additional difference between the two approaches and how they see the
       relation between facts and values. One might frame this as a matter of the “direction
       of fit” between facts and values or between the normative and the descriptive.
         Normative behaviorism is quite clear on this. The point of departure is the wish to
       be able to answer a specific question about how we ought to live and the assumption
       that this cannot be done in the mentalist way in which traditional political philosophy
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       744                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       according to Floyd has approached it. Add to this the assumption that behavior, and
       more specifically crime and insurrection, are the only reliable expressions of political
       preferences and the Humean account of reasons, the picture is one in which the facts
       about behavior and the political preferences it expresses determine the values. Norma-
       tive behaviorism, thus, offers a methodology for normative political theory in a funda-
       mental sense, since it not only tells the political theorist what to do but also explains
       how this becomes normative in the first place. This is one in which the values (or,
       rather, political principles) should fit with the facts (political preferences as expressed
       by actual behavior).                                  
         Normative sociology is different in several ways. One difference is the already noted
       one that normative sociology relies on an understanding of social reality as already nor-
       mative. So where normative behaviorism seeks to base the normative on the descriptive,
       the iterative contextualism part of normative sociology rather sees normative theorizing
       as a refinement of something already normative. However, there is an additional and dis-
       tinct difference. As noted earlier, Modood describes his approach as a hybrid of norma-
       tive political theory and empirical political sociology. But the normative and the socio-
       logical is mixed in a way where the former directs the latter: “my empirical analyses are
       informed by advocacy, by making, say, a multiculturalist case” (2019, p. 17). Modood
       notes that most sociology already has a normative character (2019, p. 20) in the sense
       that it is motivated by specific normative concerns, which are simply often not acknowl-
       edged or, if they are, are not explicitly and systematically justified. He adds that:
         While such sociology clearly has a normative character and is explicitly politically
         interventionist and intended to change, subvert, or disrupt some aspect of society,
         it is not in full what I meant by “normative sociology” because it mainly applied
         normative ideas to understand aspects of society, how it worked, including how
         oppression operated, how it could be changed, and so on. But it did not examine
         and justify the normative ideas it applied. Normative sociology proper should do
         both: it should justify the normative ideas it deploys (Modood, 2022, p. 1).
       So, what is distinctive about normative sociology as Modood sees it is that sociology
       not only uses concepts that are motivated and formulated on the basis of normative
       concerns, but that it is also a part of such theory to examine and justify these normative
       assumptions.                                          
         This paints a picture of normative sociology where the normative values direct
       and provide the conceptual framework for the sociological investigation, and where
       the discussion and justification of these values (by means of the iterative contextualist
       approach described earlier) is part of the sociological theory in order to provide norma-
       tive grounding for sociology (2022, p. 2). This is a picture in which the facts (or, rather,
       the social science) should fit with the values.       
       What do the differences imply for how to do political theory?
       I have now compared normative behaviorism and normative sociology in four
       respects. These respects have been chosen for examination because they both pick
       out aspects in which the two approaches depart from a traditional understanding
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 745
                                                             
       of the relation between social science and normative political theory, and because
       they on closer inspection also reveal important differences between the two
       approaches. One might say that while both approaches offer alternatives to the
       traditional view of the relation between empirical social science and normative
       political theory, they offer alternatives that in these respects go in quite different
       directions.                                           
         While the two approaches both base their views about relevant facts and data
       on what might be called their expressive value, normative behaviorism is com-
       mitted to a number of epistemic claims about the evidentiary value of behavior
       that normative sociology has to reject. The normative behaviorist argument is
       epistemic in the sense that it is purely motivated by these assumptions about what
       can function as reliable evidence, whereas normative sociology is primarily moti-
       vated on normative grounds concerning representation of minority claims-mak-
       ing and respect for established norms as values in their own right.
         Normative behaviorism infers “ought” from “is” since it bases principles on
       purely descriptive claims about preferences that only gets normative force when
       combined with the Humean account of reasons. Normative sociology rather infers
       “ought” from “ought” since it bases principles on norms and values identified in
       contexts understood as already normative practices. Normative sociology, thus,
       has no need and no room for a Humean account of reasons. The two approaches
       accordingly have two fundamentally different forms of social science in mind, the
       one positive and providing a picture of social reality where values play no part,
       the other interpretative and providing a picture of social reality where values are
       indispensable.                                        
         Both approaches face versions of what might be called a normative determinacy
       problem; normative behaviorism depends on interpretation that cannot be had on
       behaviorist grounds to get specific content to the political principles that the nor-
       mative behaviorist argument seeks to justify, whereas normative sociology always
       needs to make a choice that cannot be contextually grounded about whether a new
       practice falls within the scope of a principle under consideration or not.
         Normative behaviorism holds that values (political principles) should fit with
       the facts (political preferences as expressed by actual behavior), whereas norma-
       tive sociology holds that values direct and provide the conceptual framework for
       the sociological investigation, and where the discussion and justification of these
       values is part of sociological theory. The respective understandings of social
       science are, thus, also different in the further sense that normative behaviorism
       assumes a value-free social science whereas normative sociology affirms a value-
       laden social science.                                 
         These differences mean that, while the two approaches at a general level agree
       in rejecting the traditional view of the relation between normative political theory
       and empirical social science, the specific details of the ways in which they depart
       from such a view show that they might be more distant from each other than
       from the traditional view they both reject. These differences will have different
       methodological implications. This is most evident in the different views of social
       science that the two approaches assume, which mean that quite different meth-
       ods, empirical data, and types of investigations will be relevant. The epistemic

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       746                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       strictures underlying normative behaviorism will limit the relevant types of meth-
       ods and data, generally in behaviorist, externalist, and quantitative directions,
       whereas the understanding of practices as already normative will lead normative
       sociology towards embracing much more interpretative, internalist and qualitative
       methods of investigation. Not only are the theoretical assumptions underlying the
       two approaches incompatible in a number of respects (both the epistemic assump-
       tions about evidentiary value, the meta-ethical theories of normative reasons, and
       the assumed social ontology), the practical methods recommended by the two
       approaches will also be different—in some cases to the extent that the methods
       recommended by one approach will be ruled out as inappropriate by the other.
         One might think that these differences are of little relevance if one finds the two
       views unconvincing. I have along the way indicated that both views face some chal-
       lenges, e.g., the two noted normative determinacy problems, and one might further-
       more be unconvinced by elements of each view, e.g., Floyd’s criticism of mentalism,
       his assumptions about the evidentiary value of crime and insurrection, or his claims
       about what can be justified on this basis, or Modood’s aim of basing normative
       sociology on minority claims-making. But if one brackets these questions about the
       specific substantive elements of the two views, the comparison of them still yields
       lessons of broader relevance. The two views represent types of departures from a
       traditional strict distinction between facts and values or the normative and descrip-
       tive parts of political theory. So, whether or not one is convinced by these particular
       proposals, the comparison reveals some features of the conceptual space for meth-
       odological views about the relation between social science and normative political
       theory that will be relevant to other views than the two discussed here. One of these
       features is that, as soon as one considers alternatives to the traditional view, it is not
       only the view of the normative that is challenged; the view of the factual, here the
       understanding of social science, is also part of what should be accounted for—and
       this can be done in different ways. Raising the question of how facts are relevant to
       values is, thus, not only a challenge to normative political theory; it at the same time
       raises the parallel question concerning how values are relevant to social science. As
       noted, this is both a matter of the kind of social science and the social ontology
       social science assumes (whether values are part of the picture of social reality), it is
       also a matter of how values (beyond strictly epistemic values) direct social science.
       The discussion of facts in normative political theory, thus, connects to the broader
       discussion of values in science (e.g., Elliott, 2022).
         The discussion of the relation between facts and values is not meta-ethical but
       methodological in the sense that it will have implications for what political theo-
       rists should do (see Maynard, 2022 on the distinction between meta-ethics, meth-
       odology, and methods). The comparison shows how specific views of the relation
       between facts and values link to specific views of social science, which in turn will
       imply that some methods will be relevant, and others will not. Normative behavior-
       ism for instance means that political theorists should not use traditional “mentalist”
       methods such as thought experiments designed to elicit considered judgments but
       should rather rely on (or themselves conduct) empirical experiments, while norma-
       tive sociology will reject theoretical arguments for normative principles if they have
       not taken the expressed views of minorities whose situation are to be assessed by

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative sociology and normative behaviorism: recent… 747
                                                             
       these principles into account. But these are just examples of how alternative views
       of the relation between facts and values might change our understanding of what
       normative political theorists should do and which methods are appropriate in politi-
       cal theory—and which are in turn likely to have significant implications for the nor-
       mative conclusions arrived at.                        
       Funding Open access funding provided by Roskilde University.
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
       use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
       sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
       licenses/by/4.0/.                                     
       References                                            
                                                             
       Baderin, A. (2023) Behaviour and thoughts: For a pluralistic model of empirically informed political phi-
         losophy. Political Studies Review 21: 476–482.      
       Bauböck, R. (2008) Normative political theory and empirical research. In D. Della Porta and M. Keat-
         ing (eds.) Approaches and methodologies in the social sciences. Cambridge University Press, pp.
         40–60.                                              
       Berlin, I. (2013) Does political theory still exist? In H. Hardy (ed.) Concepts and categories: Philosophi-
         cal essays 2nd edn, pp. 187–225. Princeton University Press.
       De Vries, R. and Gordijn, B. (2009) Empirical ethics and its alleged meta-ethical fallacies. Bioethics,
         23(4): 193–201.                                     
       Dodd, J. and Stern-Gillet, S. (1995) The is/ought gap, the fact/value distinction and the naturalistic fal-
         lacy. Dialogue 34: 727–746.                         
       Dowding, K. (2020) The relationship between political philosophy and political science. Australian Jour-
         nal of Political Science 55: 432–444.               
       Dowding, K. (2023) Behavioural evidence, yes; normative behaviourism, no. Political Studies Review 21:
         447–453.                                            
       Elliott, K. (2022) Values in science. Cambridge University Press.
       Erman, E. and Möller, N. (2023) Does normative behaviourism offer an alternative methodology in polit-
         ical theory? Political Studies Review 21: 454–461.  
       Floyd, J. (2016) Normative behaviourism and global political principles. Journal of International Politi-
         cal Theory 12: 152–168.                             
       Floyd, J. (2017) Is political philosophy impossible? Thoughts and behaviour in normative political the-
         ory. Cambridge University Press.                    
       Floyd, J. (2020) Normative behaviourism as a solution to four problems in realism and non-ideal theory.
         Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 23: 137–162.
       Floyd, J. (2022) Political philosophy’s methodological moment and the rise of public political philoso-
         phy. Society 59: 129–139.                           
       Floyd, J. (2023) Can real actions justify realist principles? Normative behaviourism as a member of the
         realist family. Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 26: 356–375.
       Gerring, J. and Yesnowitz, J. (2006) A normative turn in political science? Polity 38: 101–133.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       748                                       S. Lægaard  
                                                             
       Graham, G. (2023) Behaviorism. In E.N. Zalta and U. Nodelman (eds.) The Stanford encyclopedia of
         philosophy. (Spring 2023 edn). Retrieved November 16, 2023, from https:// plato. stanf ord. edu/ archi
         ves/ spr20 23/ entri es/ behav iorism/).            
       Grant, R.W. (2002) Political theory, political science, and politics. Political Theory 30: 577–595.
       Levey, G.B. (2019) The Bristol school of multiculturalism. Ethnicities 19: 200–226.
       Lægaard, S. (2019) Contextualism in normative political theory and the problem of critical distance. Eth-
         ical Theory and Moral Practice 22: 953–970.         
       Maynard, J.L. (2022) Political realism as methods not metaethics. Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 25:
         449–463.                                            
       Miller, D. (2023) Why normative behaviorialism fails. Political Studies Review 21: 441–446.
       Modood, T. (2019) Essays on secularism and multiculturalism. Rowman & Littlefield.
       Modood, T. (2022) Bristol school of multiculturalism as normative sociology. Civic Sociology 3(1):
         57379. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1525/ cs. 2022. 57379.
       Modood, T. (2023) Empirical and normative without a universal human nature. Political Studies Review
         21: 462–468.                                        
       Modood, T. and Thompson, S. (2018) Revisiting contextualism in political theory: Putting principles into
         context. Res Publica 24: 339–357.                   
       Perez, N. (2020) What are data good for anyway? A typology of usages of data in contemporary political
         theory. Social Theory and Practice 46: 339–364.     
       Perez, N. (2023) How much data for the political theorist? On the argumentative normative behaviour-
         ism. Political Studies Review 21: 469–475.          
       Perez, N. (2024) Empirical political theory: A template for a research design and a qualified defense.
         Political Studies Review. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 14789 29924 12317 82.
       Stevens, S. (2023) Normative behaviourism: Groups it cannot reach? Critical Review of International
         Social and Political Philosophy. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 13698 230. 2023. 22811 49.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Sune Lægaard , Ph.D., is associate dean for education at the department of communication and arts at
       Roskilde University in Denmark. He works in political philosophy on issues related to nationalism and
       multiculturalism, including debates about toleration, politics and religion, and free speech. He is also
       engaged in debates about the methodology of political theory where he has published on contextualism in
       normative polical theory. He is editor-in-chief of the journal Res Publica (published by Springer).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             