[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:873–876       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00775-8            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Nancy Fraser and politics                             
                                                             
       Marjan Ivković and Zona Zarić Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press,
       2024, 235 pp., ISBN: 978-1-3995-1957-1                
                                                             
       Dan Boscov‑Ellen1                                     
                                                             
       Published online: 16 September 2025                   
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       We inhabit a political conjuncture characterized by intersecting crisis points: gro-
       tesque economic inequality and elite capture of political institutions, precipitous
       ecological decline and looming scarcities, record human displacement and ris-
       ing xenophobic reaction, crumbling infrastructures and disintegrating safety nets
       replaced by new technologies of repression. These metastasizing maladies are
       increasingly impossible to ignore, and many people have a sense that they are nei-
       ther unconnected nor accidental; there is, as the renowned critical theorist Nancy
       Fraser argues in her recent book Cannibal Capitalism, “a growing awareness that
       the heterogeneous ills—financial, economic, ecological, political, social—that sur-
       round us can be traced to a common root” (Fraser, 2022, p. 1).
         Yet Fraser also cautions that this awareness remains rather vague and gestural
       for most—in part because, after decades of liberal and poststructuralist hegemony
       in the academy, the political-theoretical tools required to make sense of our situ-
       ation sit disused and rusting. In dark times such as these, there is a pressing need
       for analysis that can illuminate, but we find ourselves facing “a capitalist crisis of
       great severity without a critical theory that clarifies it—let alone points us toward
       an emancipatory resolution” (Fraser, 2022, p. 2). One can see, then, why interest in
       Fraser’s work has continued to grow; she has always emphasized the need to address
       the common structural underpinnings of seemingly disparate social harms while
       progressively refining her analysis of their mutual imbrication, and the appeal of a
       theoretical approach that “brings together in a single frame all the oppressions, con-
       tradictions, and conflicts of the present conjuncture” (Fraser, 2022, p. xv) is greater
       than ever today.                                      
         Nancy Fraser and Politics thus arrives at an opportune time. Authors Marjan
       Ivković and Zona Zarić write that their book “not only pays homage to [Fraser’s]
       enduring impact” in the fields of sociology, philosophy, and political theory,
       but “situates her work as an essential cornerstone for anyone seeking to navigate
       *                                                     
         Dan Boscov-Ellen                                    
         dboscove@pratt.edu                                  
       1 Pratt Institute, Brooklyn, New York 11205, USA      
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       874                                     D. Boscov-Ellen
                                                             
       and transform the current economic and social landscapes” (p. 221). Ivković and
       Zarić chart the development of Fraser’s positions on key issues over her career,
       while simultaneously pulling out common threads that run through her oeuvre in
       an attempt to specify what is distinct about her approach to critical theory and to
       explain why it is such “a powerful and sophisticated analytical prism” (p. 8) through
       which to explore the structural injustices of capitalist society.
         While Nancy Fraser and Politics offers a helpful introduction for Fraser’s newer
       readers, those already acquainted with her work will also find much to engage with
       here. Of note is the exploration of Fraser’s methodology in the book’s first chapter.
       As Fraser “has not systematically delineated the foundational assumptions under-
       pinning her theoretical framework,” Ivković and Zarić set out to “reconstruct these
       assumptions in the form of a coherent metatheoretical position…” (p. 10). In this
       effort, they place particular emphasis on Fraser’s critical appropriation of the prag-
       matist philosophical tradition, arguing that the “central tenets of pragmatism” con-
       stitute “the basis of Fraser’s critical theory” (pp. 14 and 15). Marshalling various
       examples spanning Fraser’s career, they attempt to show that Fraser’s approach is
       best understood “as a ‘pragmatist reformulation’ of the project of critical theory…
       that in many ways goes beyond Habermas’s transcendental-pragmatic rearticulation”
       (p. 15). This is seen, for instance, in Fraser’s reappropriation of Habermas’s distinc-
       tion between systemic and social logics of action coordination, which in Fraser’s
       hands becomes a non-essentialist perspectival dualism—a pair of complementary
       lenses through which a theorist can view social reality.
         One could quibble that this genealogy of Fraser’s methodological commitments
       perhaps gives disproportionate weight to neo-pragmatist and Wittgensteinian anti-
       foundationalism. Despite the authors’ acknowledgement that Fraser “understands
       critical theory in terms of Marx’s dictum of the ‘self-clarification of the struggles
       and wishes of our age’” (p. 11), the Marxian aspect of Fraser’s approach seems com-
       paratively downplayed (perhaps this is because Ivković and Zarić wish to clearly dis-
       tinguish Fraser’s version of critical theory from the dogmatism and class-reductiv-
       ism of orthodox Marxism and the totalizing critiques of the early Frankfurt School).
       Regardless, the book insightfully highlights how Fraser’s fundamental methodologi-
       cal commitments help her to reject false antitheses, incorporating analytically useful
       aspects of seemingly incompatible theoretical perspectives into a holistic but fallibil-
       istic and context-sensitive critique of contemporary capitalist society.
         The book’s subsequent chapters explore how Fraser’s particular approach to
       critical theory has shaped her evolving conceptualizations of capitalism, femi-
       nism, the public sphere, and emancipation. The second chapter’s discussion of
       Fraser’s theory of capitalism is another high point, flowing organically from the
       initial methodological reconstruction. Ivković and Zarić characterize Fraser’s
       mature theory of capitalism as “a sedimentation and systemization of her numer-
       ous interventions in theoretical debates and societal struggles” (p. 36) over the
       years, holding out Fraser’s “problem-driven, pragmatic and highly interactive
       road to formulating a systematic account of capitalism” (p. 36) as a model for
       engaged social theory that responds to the central problems of a political con-
       juncture. Examining key exchanges with other critical theorists (Jürgen Habermas
       in the “early period”, Axel Honneth in the “middle period”, and Rahel Jaeggi

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Nancy Fraser and politics                    875      
                                                             
       in the “mature period”), Ivković and Zarić chart the dialogical development of
       Fraser’s understanding of capitalism. They aim to demonstrate that although
       Fraser’s “overall image of capitalism in the early period…is still rather fragmen-
       tary” (p. 40) and her middle-period focus on normative critique largely brackets
       the “social-theoretical and historical dimensions of conceptualizing capitalism”
       (p. 55), her mature theory of capitalism builds directly upon these earlier conver-
       sations and innovations.                              
         Retracing the route through which Fraser arrives at her mature account of capi-
       talism is instructive in several respects. This review provides important intellec-
       tual-historical context for Fraser’s “mature” conceptualization of capitalism as an
       institutionalized social order—comprised not only of the capitalist economy but
       also the multiple “hidden abodes” upon which it necessarily depends and shaped
       by historical “boundary struggles” over the constitution and status of these sub-
       ordinate spheres. Further, it also casts the earlier debates in a new light, inviting
       the reader to consider how these later refinements might retrospectively clarify
       earlier problematics.                                 
         The remaining chapters take a similar approach, but while often insightful,
       they do not always match the consistent focus of the book’s opening. This seems,
       in part, to be a structural issue; chapters two through five chart Fraser’s evolving
       ideas about different topics, but there is substantial overlap between them, and so
       at points (particularly in the chapters on Fraser’s views of feminism and emanci-
       pation) the argument can become a bit repetitive in content as well as structure. In
       a few of the later exegetical passages, Fraser’s formulations are also considerably
       clearer than the authors’ commentary on them (though, to be fair, that may be
       nearly inevitable given Fraser’s genius for developing framings that clarify com-
       plexity without oversimplification).                  
         On the other hand, there are also moments where one would like to see the
       authors develop their own insights further. Ivković and Zarić are generally quite
       laudatory of Fraser’s approach to critical theory, and while they offer some
       intriguing glimpses of their own distinct perspectives on certain questions, they
       tend to do so only parenthetically. For example, they briefly gesture toward the
       unrealized possibility of synthesizing Fraser’s Foucauldian “analysis of post-
       Fordist governmentality and her Gramscian conception of progressive-neolib-
       eral hegemony” (p. 167), which they characterize as potentially complementary
       before dropping the thought. They also begin to question Fraser’s recent position
       concerning the existence of a genuine legitimation crisis post-2016, holding to
       the “somewhat stronger criteria for what constitutes a legitimation crisis” articu-
       lated in Fraser’s pre-Trump writings and suggesting that we remain in a “crisis of
       authority” rather than of legitimation (p. 173). This too feels like a question ripe
       for further exploration, but is left as an aside.     
         Despite a few missed opportunities to pursue its own lines of critique, Nancy
       Fraser and Politics clearly succeeds in central aims, providing a timely and illu-
       minating exploration of Fraser’s critical-theoretical method and vital analysis of
       contemporary capitalist society. It should prove a valuable resource for anyone
       who wants to better understand how we got into this mess, and to envision how
       we might yet get ourselves out of it together.        

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       876                                     D. Boscov-Ellen
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Fraser, N. (2022) Cannibal capitalism: How our system is devouring democracy, care, and the planet—
         And what we can do about it. Verso Books.           
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             