[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:27            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00803-1            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       The life and thought of Alexandre Kojève              
                                                             
       Marco Filoni, trans. David Broder, Evanston: Northwestern University
       Press 2025, p. 271                                    
                                                             
       Wojciech Engelking1                                   
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       There is a recognizable type of twentieth-century European political philosopher who
       attracts a particular kind of fascination because of one biographical element: proxim-
       ity to the upper reaches of power. Cast as distant relatives of Plato sailing to Syracuse,
       or as exemplars of the theses of the ‘treason of the intellectuals’ or of the ‘reckless
       mind’, these thinkers are frequently subjected to an interpretative burden that sub-
       ordinates their theoretical output to a perceived—and often hyperbolized—political
       agency. Under such a paradigm, biographical nuances also are flattened into a singu-
       lar, narrow dimension. Conversely, an antithetical methodological approach seeks to
       insulate the work entirely from the life of the mind, reducing these philosophers to
       mere participants in an abstract, disembodied discourse.
         Marco Filoni’s investigation into Alexandre Kojève—perhaps the most compel-
       ling figure in this category—successfully navigates a via media between these two
       extremes. In a work originally published in Italy in 2021 and rendered into English by
       David Broder, Filoni, a professor of philosophy at Link Campus University in Rome
       and translator of several Kojève’s texts into Italian, traces the reciprocal influence
       between his protagonist’s lived experience and philosophical development.
         Noting that early interest in Kojève ‘had generated a great deal of mythology’ (p.
       vii), Filoni presents him not so much as an ‘éminence grise of international trade
       policy’ (p. 9), but as a man of action whose entry into an administrative career fol-
       lowed from a determinate intellectual choice. The latter—to leave the republic of
       writers—is understood against the backdrop of the particular kind of thinker Kojève
       was: driven by a hunger for holistic reflection on reality. In Filoni’s work, this is
       not merely a matter of Kojève’s youthful ‘determination … to take on a universal
       philosophical mission … [an] extraordinary intellectual voracity and an encyclopedic
       capacity for learning’ (pp. 118–119), but rather: of his conviction that, although ‘phi-
                                                             
         Wojciech Engelking                                  
         w.engelking@wpia.uw.edu.pl                          
       1 University of Warsaw, Warsaw 00-927, Poland         
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        27 Page 2 of 4                          W. Engelking 
                                                             
       losophy necessarily aspires to wisdom, that is, to the universal knowledge consisting
       of all the questions that the philosopher can ask even about himself … philosophy …
       [is only] the path toward wisdom and absolute knowledge’ (p. 160).
         The lion’s share of Filoni’s book is a narrative of Kojève’s efforts to satisfy the
       ‘hunger’ mentioned above. Filoni proceeds chronologically, consistently situating
       Kojève within distinct intellectual milieux. The first is Russia’s Silver Age. In recon-
       structing it, Filoni identifies the ‘philosophical-religious reference points to which
       the young Alexandre looked in the first years of his cultural formation’ (p. 23), above
       all: the thought of Dostoevsky (and the problem of individual freedom), Solovyov
       (and the problem of the absolute as the unity of self and other), and Minsky (and the
       question of non-existence). Filoni also locates in this period Kojève’s fascination
       with eastern philosophical systems that, already at a young age, led him to reject the
       identity of thinking and being.                       
         Then, after sketching—almost in the manner of an adventure novel—the circum-
       stances of Kojève’s escape from post-revolutionary Russia and his coming into the
       family fortune, Filoni turns to the second formative milieu: 1920s Weimar Republic.
       He identifies two sites as especially consequential. The first is Heidelberg: a city
       that became the arena for a dispute over the essence of philosophy between Jaspers
       and Rickert, whose neo-Kantian ‘culture of systematicity’, despite Kojève’s aversion
       to Rickert himself, strengthened a totalizing impulse in his thinking. This tendency
       is apparent in his dissertation on Solovyov, presented as the author of a ‘universal
       philosophical system, complete and finished in itself’ (p. 99), and as a translator of
       Schelling’s thought into the idiom of Orthodox religiosity. Heidelberg is set against
       Berlin: the site where Kojève encountered Kant-Forschung and expressionism, and
       where he embarked on his studies of the east, contiguous with his interest in atheism.
         For Filoni, however, the decisive milieu in the formation of Kojève’s thought is
       Paris: Filoni emphasizes his attendance at Fermi’s lectures, arguing that Kojève’s
       reading of Planck’s quantum hypothesis—understood as undermining the classical
       ideal of a causality whose verification would be straightforwardly attainable—cata-
       lyzed a transformation of his mode of thinking:       
         For Kojève, the ‘revolutionary’ aspect of quantum physics was that it intro-
         duced, in the very heart of the notion of the real, the ‘irreducible-duality’
         between the observed system and the observing system—and this observing
         system can itself split into two systems, since it, too, is a physical system, and
         this can take place infinitely through the successive splitting of the observed
         system (p. 125).                                    
       On Filoni’s account, Kojève’s encounter with quantum physics entailed a rejection
       of the Laplacean fantasy of an omniscient observer and, with it, the dissolution of
       any need for an ‘Absolute with a function in the real world … quantum physics had
       shown the need to rule out any objectively absolute determination of the world’ (p.
       126). As a consequence, Kojève shifted his focus from deterministic causality ‘to the
       notion of “legality”’ (p. 123). It is in this latter notion that Filoni anchors Kojève’s
       reflections on the struggle between master and slave, construed as a conflict over
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The life and thought of Alexandre Kojève Page 3 of 4 27
                                                             
       recognition— that, in Filoni’s reconstruction, is inseparable from the juridical dimen-
       sion of right.                                        
         The theme of Kojève’s turn toward quantum physics—understood as the ground of
       his anti-absolutism, which the philosopher regarded as modernity’s epistemological
       core—is the most valuable element of Filoni’s book. Although this line of inquiry has
       been pursued by other scholars, Filoni develops it with remarkable detail and com-
       prehensiveness, presenting it as ‘the thread of continuity that tied Kojève’s thought
       together [which] was always the never sufficiently investigated idea of the essential
       otherness of humanity with respect to nature, of the irreconcilability between the
       living and the properly human (autopoiesis in freedom)’ (p. 155). In this turn—sub-
       sequently developed within the framework of historical anthropology, whose concep-
       tual machinery for generating a vocabulary of recognition, negativity, and statehood
       was the famous Hegel seminar—Filoni sees Kojève abandoning truth as the phi-
       losopher’s object of pursuit, insofar as truth is recognized as non-transcendental and
       temporally variable. From this follows Kojève’s interest in the space within which it
       is transformed: political institutions.               
         The theme of Kojève’s accession to the latter is taken up in the final chapter,
       in which Filoni narrates Kojève’s entry into the French administration. Drawing
       on Kojève’s own self-interpretations—such as his debate ‘with Leo Strauss on tyr-
       anny… If the philosopher has no possibility of acting politically without abandoning
       philosophy, is he then justified in abandoning political action?’ (p. 183)—as well
       as his conviction that historical achievement is the sole criterion by which political
       deeds are to be judged, Filoni resists mythologizing the philosopher’s assumption of
       a diplomat’s mantle in the domain of international trade. He therefore does not align
       himself with that camp of Kojève interpreters who maintain that ‘Kojève perhaps see
       this career as offering him the possibility of presiding over the end of history’ (p. 9).
       At the same time, Filoni’s presentation of Kojève’s bureaucratic phase largely outside
       a philosophical register appears, to a degree, consonant with Kojève’s own choice:
       if, as Filoni puts it, ‘what seemed to interest him most was how to realize wisdom,
       in practical life, in his work as a civil servant’ (p. 14), then, because philosophy
       is merely a path toward wisdom, it could only be set aside. (This is also because
       Kojève’s text that most clearly sits at the intersection of philosophy and politics—
       his vision of a Latin Empire—failed, as Filoni stresses, to gain approval within the
       French administration.) At this juncture in Filoni’s narrative, the figure of Kojève as a
       thinker driven by a hunger for a comprehensive grasp of reality gives way to Kojève
       as a seducer, whose political practice manifests itself in the dialectical outmaneuver-
       ing of opponents.                                     
         One might, however, be tempted to suggest that it is precisely philosophy—espe-
       cially pursued in relation to quantum physics and the displacement of truth by prob-
       ability—that could illuminate at least some of the doubts Filoni raises as to whether,
       when Kojève ‘shifted nonchalantly between writing texts for the founding of a new
       Pétainist state in the spirit of the Révolution Nationale, and authoring propaganda
       pamphlets for the Resistance … was he playing a double game? … Was this a matter
       of blind opportunism?’ (p. 183). (A further instance of such shifting is the depositing
       of the manuscript of a work on wisdom together with a personal letter to Stalin at
       the Soviet Embassy in Paris.) It is clear, however, that deploying such a move would

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        27 Page 4 of 4                          W. Engelking 
                                                             
       entail an interpretive step beyond the bounds of a biography—which is, above all,
       what Filoni’s book is. Yet its broad intellectual horizon allows one to hope that this
       very line of interpretation will eventually be pursued, whether by Filoni himself or
       by one of the readers he inspired.                    
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             