[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:669–689       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00773-w            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach
                                                             
       Matteo Bonotti1 · Zim Nwokora2                        
                                                             
                                                             
       Accepted: 13 June 2025 / Published online: 30 July 2025
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Free speech is a fundamental right in liberal democracies. Yet, liberal democracies
       often face difficult decisions about whether, when and how to curtail various types
       of speech—including hate speech, pornography, fake news, and offensive speech. In
       this climate, there is a pressing need to reappraise the case for free speech protec-
       tion and re-establish shared grounds for its legitimacy. This paper asks whether and
       to what extent social change has affected the ability of the three main arguments
       for free speech—truth, autonomy, and democracy—to provide a public justification
       for (and therefore legitimize) free speech protection. By drawing on John Rawls’s
       (2005) idea of public reason we evaluate the main arguments for free speech in soci-
       eties transformed by five processes: greater individualism, international migration,
       post-truth communication, increasing awareness of cognitive biases, and rapid tech-
       nological change. We conclude that the truth and autonomy arguments lose their
       force as a result of these processes and that only the democracy argument can pro-
       vide a public justification for free speech as a constitutionally protected right in con-
       temporary democratic societies characterized by social change.
       Keywords Free speech · Truth · Autonomy · Democracy · Social change · Public
       reason                                                
                                                             
       Free speech is a fundamental right in liberal democracies. Yet, liberal democracies
       often face difficult decisions about whether, when and how to curtail various types
       of speech—including hate speech, pornography, fake news, and offensive speech—
       resulting in increasingly polarized debates on free speech and its regulation (Bonotti
                                                             
       *                                                     
         Matteo Bonotti                                      
         matteo.bonotti@monash.edu                           
         Zim Nwokora                                         
         z.nwokora@deakin.edu.au                             
       1 Monash University, Politics and International Relations, School of Social Sciences, Clayton
         Campus, Melbourne, VIC 3800, Australia              
       2 Deakin University, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Burwood Campus, Melbourne,
         VIC 3125, Australia                                 
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       670                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       & Seglow, 2021). In this climate, there is a pressing need to reappraise the case for
       free speech protection and re-establish shared grounds for its legitimacy.
         A vast normative scholarship debates free speech regulation, including the
       question of why free speech deserves to be protected in the first place. For exam-
       ple, some have argued that free speech can help preserve diversity, pluralism, and
       toleration, which are central values in liberal societies; others that free speech
       protection provides a safeguard against governments’ inclination to expand their
       legal and policy powers, or against the possibility that they might make wrong
       decisions (for a summary of these arguments, see Barendt, 2005; Bonotti &
       Seglow, 2021). There have also been some limited endeavours to defend feminist
       (Williams, 2009) and Marxist (Heinze, 2018a, 2018b) arguments for free speech.
         While acknowledging these varied justifications for free speech, we focus here
       on the truth, autonomy, and democracy arguments. This is partly for pragmatic
       reasons—with a narrower focus we can engage in a more systematic analysis of
       these arguments—but also, more fundamentally, because they are the most prom-
       inent in the literature on free speech as well as in US First Amendment debates
       and legal and political debates about free speech in many other liberal democra-
       cies (Barendt, 2005; Bonotti & Seglow, 2021). We analyse, more specifically, the
       largely unaddressed questions of whether and to what extent social change has
       affected the ability of these arguments to provide a public justification for (and
       therefore legitimize) free speech protection.         
         The conception of public justification that we rely on is John Rawls’s (2005)
       idea of public reason, i.e. the view that political rules are legitimate only if they
       are justified based on reasons that all citizens, as free and equal, could accept
       at some level of idealization. According to Rawls and other political liberals,
       appealing to public reasons is especially important to justify constitutional prin-
       ciples, including a constitutionally protected right to free speech (e.g. as in the
       US First Amendment). We evaluate, in terms of public reason, the main argu-
       ments advanced in support of free speech (i.e. truth, autonomy, and democracy)
       in societies transformed by five processes: greater individualism, international
       migration, post-truth communication, increasing awareness of cognitive biases,
       and rapid technological change. The three free speech arguments we focus on
       were mostly conceived between the late nineteenth century and the immediate
       post-WWII decades, but they continue to resonate strongly in the scholarship
       and in legal and political debates about free speech. Our analysis aims to clarify
       whether, given the markedly different context of contemporary liberal democra-
       cies, free speech protection can still be justified by these arguments.
         Our approach has the virtue of drawing together several contemporary forces
       of social change, on the one hand, and the main justifications for free speech, on
       the other hand, to provide a fairly holistic assessment of the rationales underlying
       this fundamental right. By contrast, previous studies in this research agenda limit
       their attention to specific justifications for free speech (e.g. Brison, 1998; Post,
       2011); or particular forms of speech such as hate speech (e.g. Brown, 2015a,
       2015b; Waldron, 2012), pornography (e.g. Langton, 1993, 2009; McGowan,
       2019), and disinformation (e.g. Chambers, 2021; Schauer, 2012); or a single
       change process such as the emergence of broadcast television (Fiss, 1986) or

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 671
                                                             
       online communication (Brison & Gelber, 2019). The more integrated perspective
       that we offer here provides a better basis to demonstrate the special merits of the
       democracy argument, particularly when it is understood as a case for deliberative
       democracy, as a justification for free speech in the context of a modern liberal
       democracy.                                            
         It should be noted that while we often refer to liberal democracies in general, our
       more precise focus is the group of high-income liberal democracies in North America
       (the United States and Canada), Western Europe (e.g. Britain, Germany, and France),
       and Oceania (Australia and New Zealand). Despite stark differences in the regulation
       on free speech in these countries—compare, for example, the permissive free speech
       environment in the US with the more controlled environments of Britain, Germany,
       and Austria where hate speech and/or Holocaust denial are regulated (Barendt, 2005)—
       they together represent the arena in which the debates on free speech have mostly
       developed and, critically for our analysis, the social changes we focus on have been
       most prominent. As this suggests, we understand social change as a cluster of develop-
       ments within a particular context, not a homogeneous and uniform process.
         The paper proceeds as follows. First, we set out a ‘public reason test’ for the pro-
       tection of free speech in liberal democracies. The constitutional protection of free
       speech is legitimate, we contend, when it is justified by appealing to widely accepted
       public reasons. Crucially, however, these reasons cannot be assessed in the abstract
       or in isolation from prevailing social norms and thus social change. Developing this
       argument in this second section, we identify five social change processes that can
       strengthen or weaken arguments for free speech grounded in truth, autonomy, or
       democracy. These processes, the literature suggests, have significant and lasting con-
       sequences, but they also have contrasting effects on the three free speech rationales.
       In particular, the truth and autonomy arguments lose their force as a result of social
       change. The third section explains why this is the case. The democracy argument,
       however, is strengthened by social change, as we explain in the fourth section. From
       this we conclude that only the democracy argument can provide a public justifica-
       tion for free speech as a constitutionally protected right in contemporary democratic
       societies, while the other arguments can no longer satisfy this condition.
       The legitimacy of free speech: public reason and social change
       Our approach to free speech is grounded in public reason. In this section, we flesh
       out this notion and explain how free speech arguments can be assessed in terms of
       public reason, and how this approach can be used to assess free speech arguments
       under conditions of social change.                    
         Public reason is a widely endorsed ideal in contemporary liberal political the-
       ory. It demands that, in view of reasonable disagreement and in order to respect
       citizens as free and equal persons, political rules (and especially constitutional prin-
       ciples, including free speech) are only legitimate if they are justified with reasons
       that all citizens could accept at some level of idealization and despite their differ-
       ent conceptions of the good (Rawls, 2005). Public reasons should appeal to shared
       political values such as individual liberty, equality of opportunity, and values tied to
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       672                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       the common good (moral content) as well as to shared ‘guidelines of inquiry’, ‘the
       methods and conclusions of science’, and ‘plain truths now widely accepted’ (epis-
       temic/factual content) (Rawls, 2005, pp. 224, 225).   
         Some of the existing literature on free speech does consider empirical evidence—
       for instance, in relation to hate speech and pornography—in the evaluation of argu-
       ments for the protection and regulation of free speech (see, e.g. Bonotti & Seglow,
       2021). But our analysis is distinctive compared to this work because, rather than
       focusing on specific instances of free speech, it develops an approach that can be
       applied across different contexts and categories of speech, and which also assigns a
       central importance to social change. Public reason should be sensitive to empirical
       reality and social change. As Rawls himself argues, political rules should be publicly
       justified by appealing to ‘presently accepted general beliefs and forms of reason-
       ing…[and]…plain truths now widely accepted, or available, to citizens generally’
       (Rawls, 2005, pp. 224, 225, emphasis added). And, he adds, ‘new variations [of
       public reason] may be proposed from time to time and older ones may cease to be
       represented. It is important that this be so; otherwise the claims of groups or inter-
       ests arising from social change might be repressed and fail to gain their appropriate
       political voice’ (Rawls, 2005, p. 452, emphasis added).
         Some authors have questioned the ability of public reason to accommodate new
       ideas and justifications for political rules as a result of social change, thus criticiz-
       ing it for being overly conservative. According to Waldron, for example, ‘Rawls’
       conception seems to [imply]…that something counts as a legitimate move in public
       reasoning only to the extent that it latches onto existing premises that everybody
       already shared’ (1993, pp. 837–8). However, Solum (1996) and Flanders (2012)
       have cogently shown that Rawls’s emphasis on ‘available’ reasons in the aforemen-
       tioned passage can accommodate social change: citizens, that is, may not be pres-
       ently accepting certain (novel) reasons but they could if they considered them care-
       fully, or they might already accept them without realizing it. This may allow scope
       for novel reasons reflecting social change. Acknowledging the mutability of public
       reason is particularly important at times when a society is undergoing transforma-
       tive change, to ensure that its constitution does not become ‘outdated’ and instead
       remains anchored in the values of the society it seeks to reflect and support (Nwok-
       ora, 2022).                                           
         Social change can affect both the moral and the empirical (i.e. epistemic and
       factual) content of public reason. When it comes to its moral content, for example,
       values such as gender and racial equality have gradually become part of the shared
       public political culture of liberal democracies, but they were not in the past. As these
       societies evolve, values related to, say, environmentalism (White & Ypi, 2016, Ch.
       3) or animal welfare (Flanders, 2014), as well as more refined understandings of
       existing shared political values, may also become part of that shared public politi-
       cal culture. However, the opposite process, involving a haemorrhaging of shared
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 673
                                                             
       political values, may also occur in a polarizing society.1 Our key point is that social
       change can affect the moral content of public reason to the extent that it affects (i.e.
       increases or decreases) the agreement on certain values. But social change can also
       affect the empirical content of public reason if, for example, the empirical assump-
       tions underlying the public justification for free speech protection no longer hold
       or are shown to be flawed. It is therefore important to incorporate current evidence
       about social reality into the process of public reasoning.
         Using public reason as the touchstone, our goal in the remainder of the paper is to
       evaluate the three main arguments for free speech—based on truth, autonomy, and
       democracy—in light of social change. Each of the arguments has a moral compo-
       nent (i.e. the normative goal that free speech, according to that argument, can help
       to realize) and an empirical component (i.e. the empirical conditions, not always
       explicit, which the argument assumes). We consider how these arguments, in both of
       their aspects, have been affected by several prominent processes of change in West-
       ern liberal democracies. By doing so, we are able to clarify how social change has
       reconfigured the legitimation of free speech protection.
       Processes of social change                            
                                                             
       Free speech scholars have often been attentive to the consequences for speech aris-
       ing from particular instances social change, for example in relation to issues such as
       hate speech (e.g. Brown, 2015a, 2015b; Waldron, 2012), pornography (e.g. Langton,
       1993, 2009; McGowan, 2019), fake news and conspiracism (e.g. Chambers, 2021;
       Schauer, 2012), no-platforming (e.g. Simpson, 2020), and online speech (Brison &
       Gelber, 2019). However, a limit of this literature is that it applies the main existing
       arguments for free speech to specific instances of social change without developing
       a more holistic and systematic reflection on whether and how social change more
       generally (and in its various broad manifestations) may challenge the very legiti-
       macy of those arguments.                              
         A rare exception to this tendency is provided by Owen Fiss who, writing in the
       1980s, highlighted the impact of modern mass communication on US free speech
       jurisprudence. Fiss observed that the Free Speech Tradition—the collection of
       encounters between the Supreme Court and the US First Amendment—is defined by
       the simple but powerful image of the street corner speaker who risks being silenced
       by the state (in particular, a police officer) (see also Schauer, 1983). Free speech
       jurisprudence has largely been an effort to protect the speaker by restricting the
       police officer in all but the most extreme of circumstances (e.g. when the speaker is
       inciting a mob). As Fiss stressed, however, ‘today [in 1986, at the time of his writ-
       ing] there are no street corners’ (1986, p. 1409). A framework built from this prem-
       ise, he thought, was ill-equipped for more modern political communication. For
       1 There may also be the challenge, in a polarizing society, of a splintering of ‘the public’ into multiple
       publics including, potentially, ‘anti-publics’ who flout democratic norms (Davis, 2021). Creating oppor-
       tunities for deliberation is critical in such circumstances because deliberation can be an antidote to polar-
       ization (Fishkin et al., 2021).                       
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       674                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       Fiss, the main challenge was the emergence of broadcast television as networks such
       as CBS (which served as the focal case in his study) were both forum and speaker,
       and both private and public. Their presence therefore demanded ‘a reevaluation of
       the stereotypical roles portrayed in the Tradition’s little drama’ (Fiss, 1986, p. 1414).
       Were Fiss writing today, he would no doubt see further and perhaps bigger issues
       arising from more recent changes to the mass media landscape, including the rise of
       the Internet and social media (see, e.g. Brison & Gelber, 2019).
         Here, following Fiss, we also ask how the legitimacy of free speech has been
       shaped by empirical considerations. But we consider a wider range of empirical
       processes than Fiss did, drawing from the vast, multidisciplinary scholarship on the
       modern forces of social change (e.g. Inglehart, 2016; Kymlicka, 1995; McGinnis,
       2013; Muirhead & Rosenblum, 2019; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). From this work we
       identify five transformations with potentially serious consequences for free speech,
       but which have not been brought into systematic dialogue with theoretical debates
       about free speech. We do not regard these processes as the only ways in which lib-
       eral democracies have changed in recent times, but we do think that they stand out
       as crucial empirical developments that matter for the legitimization of free speech.
       Given the large literatures on each of these processes, we are unable to provide a
       detailed review of the nuances and debates associated with each and instead rely on
       a few influential or representative sources.          
         The first process of change we consider is greater individualism. By this, we
       mean the rise of a seemingly boundless focus on the individual—their expression,
       preferences, and worth. This development has been variously described in the schol-
       arship and rooted in different causal stories. According to one influential account
       (Inglehart, 2016), sustained economic growth in advanced industrial economies
       during the post-WWII years has produced ‘postmaterialist’ values, centred on indi-
       vidual autonomy, self-expression, and identity, which in turn reflect the desire of
       individuals to be emancipated from authority so that they can freely exercise their
       own choices. Ronald Inglehart and his collaborators documented the rise of these
       values in Western mass publics, and their potential to transform issue agendas, vot-
       ing behaviour, and party systems (e.g. Inglehart & Welzel, 2005; Norris & Ingle-
       hart, 2019). Similarly, Wendy Brown (2015a, 2015b) charts the marketization of
       society, driven by neoliberalism, which has profoundly changed how human beings
       see themselves. No longer do we expect ourselves, and others, to take up different
       personas in different domains, including collective identities in politics (e.g. citizen-
       ship and class). Instead, homo economicus—a figure who acts only to advance their
       personal preferences and interests—reigns supreme in all fields of life.
         The second change is international migration. Most liberal democracies have
       been transformed by migration and, from the 1980s onwards, the vast bulk of move-
       ment has been from low-income countries to a small group of advanced industri-
       alized (and mostly Western) countries (e.g. Castles, 2002). A result has been the
       importation to these liberal democracies of new cultural traits and increasing ethnic,
       linguistic, and religious diversity, compounding the new identities (e.g. around gen-
       der and sexuality) that have become prominent as a result of value change (Vertovec,
       2007; see also Kymlicka, 1995).                       

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 675
                                                             
         A third change to consider is the rise of post-truth communication. There has
       long been a conspiratorial strain in public opinion, which has challenged official
       narratives and the legitimacy of established authorities in fields such as politics, the
       media, and science. In recent years, however, conspiratorial thinking has become
       increasingly widespread and influential (Muirhead & Rosenblum, 2019). Conspira-
       cist ideologies sometimes even question the existence of an objective truth, giving
       adherents the prerogative to ‘do their own research’ and establish their own ‘facts’.2
         The fourth social change is the behavioural turn. In recent years, and particu-
       larly following the publication of Nudge (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008), there has been
       a growing understanding of the biases, heuristics, fallacies, and other cognitive ten-
       dencies that invalidate the model of individuals as purely rational agents. Though
       this realization has deep roots in economics and psychology (e.g. Tversky & Kah-
       neman, 1974), it is only in the past two decades that behavioural assumptions have
       gained traction in policy circles, including through the establishment of specialized
       behavioural policy units in countries such as Britain and the US that seek to embed
       behavioural science into the policy-making process.   
         Finally, an account of social change processes must consider the role of technol-
       ogy and the information explosion. Technology has always influenced how democ-
       racy works. But in recent decades, the acceleration of technology and especially
       computing power has created new opportunities and constraints (e.g. McGinnis,
       2013). Among the opportunities are the potential for technology to improve the flow
       of knowledge and facilitate social and political mobilization. However, the abun-
       dance of information introduces new cognitive burdens as individuals and institu-
       tions have to manage the risk of information overload and discern true from false
       pieces of information.                                
         No systematic attention has been paid to the implications of these five social
       changes for free speech debates. Yet free speech arguments are advanced, debated,
       and evaluated as the basis for legal (including constitutional) protection under
       empirical conditions that can change, and indeed have done just that. The relevant
       conditions are not always explicated when free speech arguments are formulated and
       debated but rather constitute part of their assumed ‘background’. Whatever the sta-
       tus of its empirical elements, the legitimacy of an argument justifying the constitu-
       tional protection of free speech may need to be reviewed with the passage of time
       because of the potential for change in the relevant social conditions.
         In the following sections, we reassess the three main arguments for free speech
       in light of the aforementioned social changes. For each argument, we identify the
       social assumptions underlying it; explain how these conditions have been affected
       by the various social change processes; and clarify how the status of each argument,
       as a public justification for constitutional free speech protection, has been affected as
       a result.                                             
       2 One need not be a conspiracist in order to challenge the idea of an objective or universal truth. A ‘post-
       truth’ perspective has indeed been central to postmodernism at least since the late 1970s (Lyotard, 1984).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       676                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
       The three arguments for free speech                   
                                                             
                                                             
       The truth argument for free speech was originally defended by John Stuart Mill
       in his essay On Liberty (Mill, 2006) and is often related to the ‘marketplace of
       ideas’ metaphor (Abrams v United States, 1919). According to Mill, free speech
       can help us discover the truth and hold well-founded opinions. This argument
       involves three more specific sub-arguments. For a start, silencing an opinion may
       deprive us of the truth if that opinion is correct (e.g. Galileo Galilei’s heliocentric
       theory). But even if an opinion is false, Mill argues, silencing it is still wrong
       since only by confronting and refuting false opinions can we hold true opinions
       in a critical and meaningful way, rather than as ‘dead dogmas’. Third, in many
       areas of life, Mill argues, the truth is not contained in one individual opinion but
       rather shared among multiple opinions; only by combining these partial truths
       can we discover the full truth. It is important to stress that, for Mill, not all areas
       of inquiry benefit from free speech and public debate. In scientific disciplines, for
       example, many factual truths are well-established and, therefore, we would not
       gain much benefit (i.e. not as much as in the case of philosophical, ethical, politi-
       cal, and religious disputes) from the exchange of opinions, especially false ones
       (see also Mckinnon, 2007). Indeed, a genuine process of truth discovery in areas
       such as ethics and politics must take established factual truths for granted. As
       Hannah Arendt argues,                                 
         [f]acts inform opinions, and opinions, inspired by different interests and
         passions, can differ widely and still be legitimate as long as they respect
         factual truth. Freedom of opinion is a farce unless factual information is
         guaranteed and the facts themselves are not in dispute (1968, p. 238).
         A second widely endorsed argument for freedom of speech grounds its value
       in its contribution to the exercise of individual autonomy. While this argument
       began to be systematically developed in the late twentieth century, especially
       in connection with debates concerning pornography and censorship, its roots
       are much older. Indeed, they can be traced back to the work of Immanuel Kant
       (1996), for whom the enlightenment was made possible by the free use of rea-
       son in public discourse (see also Sweet, 2024) as well as to Mill’s own work.
       Indeed, although truth discovery, we explained earlier, is the key foundational
       value underlying his theory of free speech, Mill also thought that it was impor-
       tant that people discover the truth by employing their deliberative faculties and
       critical reasoning; speech that contributes to this process (which is not all speech)
       is valuable because it is central to individual flourishing and well-being (Brink,
       2008).                                                
         There are procedural and substantive versions of the autonomy argument.
       According to the former, which are mostly defended from a listener-centred per-
       spective, free speech should be protected in order to respect the sphere of indi-
       vidual autonomy within which citizens can decide what opinions to listen to,
       what to make of them, and how to act accordingly (e.g. Dworkin, 1981; Scanlon,
       1972). Substantive versions of the autonomy argument, which tend to be more
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 677
                                                             
       (but are not exclusively) speaker-centred, emphasize instead how free speech can
       contribute to individual self-fulfilment by helping individuals flourish as autono-
       mous self-determining beings, capable of expressing and critically reflecting on
       others’ opinions and thus realizing their potential, either as speakers or as lis-
       teners (Baker, 2011; Redish, 1982). In a more recent version of the substantive
       autonomy argument, Seana Shiffrin (2014) argues that we can only fully grasp the
       distinctive content of our own minds, and be recognized by others as individuals
       with our own views, if we can engage in unconstrained communication protected
       by free speech.                                       
         The third major argument for free speech appeals to the value of democracy:
       only by having access to (and being able to express) opinions freely can citizens
       acquire the information they need to participate in democratic life, contribute to
       public debate, and hold their representatives accountable (Meiklejohn, 1948). Like
       the truth and autonomy arguments for free speech, the democracy argument too pre-
       sents different versions. For example, Cass Sunstein (1993) makes the distinction
       between ‘high-value’ political and artistic speech, which contributes significantly to
       democratic deliberation and therefore may only be subject to time, place and man-
       ner restrictions (rather than viewpoint- and content-based ones), and ‘low-value’
       speech, which is less essential for deliberation and may be subject to greater regula-
       tion. Dworkin (2009) and Weinstein (2011) defend a slightly different version of the
       argument, centred on the link between free speech and political legitimacy, whereas
       Post (2011) contends that citizens’ freedom to participate in and affect public delib-
       eration through their speech is crucial for their ability to view themselves as authors
       of the law. Yet another argument for free speech that appeals to the value of democ-
       racy—albeit more indirectly—is the view that free speech helps maintain a bal-
       ance between stability and change by allowing the expression of grievances which,
       through public discussion, can lead to social and political change, thus preventing
       turmoil and ‘maintaining economic and social conditions under which the ground
       rules of democracy can operate’ (Emerson, 1962–1963, 886).
         Here, for the sake of simplicity, we set these fine-grained distinctions aside. How-
       ever, we believe that all these different versions of the democracy argument for free
       speech share (explicitly or implicitly) an underlying assumption, i.e. that free speech
       is crucial for democracy if the latter is understood in deliberative terms. Accord-
       ing to theories of deliberative democracy, democratic decisions should not be based
       on the mere aggregation of citizens’ preferences and on majority rule but rather on
       careful discussion and the force of the better argument (O’Flynn, 2021). We believe
       that this is the conception of democracy that best justifies the protection of free
       speech: if one considers deliberation as central to democracy, then one is also likely
       to assign special importance to citizens’ right to freely communicate and exchange
       ideas in deliberative forums. Furthermore, we also accept the contention, supported
       by empirical evidence (e.g. Hong & Page, 2004; Landemore & Elster, 2012; Page,
       2007), that deliberative democracy can produce clear epistemic benefits by pooling
       information, correcting biases and logical fallacies, and encouraging a diversity of
       perspectives, all of which can contribute to better decision-making (Benson, 2021).
         It should be noted that, by claiming that the three main free speech arguments
       were mostly conceived between the late nineteenth century and the immediate

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       678                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       post-WWII decades, with hardly any innovations after the 1980s, we do not intend to
       suggest that there have not been attempts to offer new accounts of—or perspectives
       on—these arguments that are more fitting to contemporary culture, and which for
       example respond to demands raised by social justice movements or take into account
       the increasing use of social media. However, these new accounts and perspectives
       tend to involve the application of the existing arguments to new scenarios rather
       than the formulation of new or revised arguments. Consider, for example, one of the
       major edited collections on free speech and the Internet published in recent years
       (Brison & Gelber, 2019). Contributors’ references to the three main justifications for
       free speech protection include very traditional understandings of truth (Post, 2019,
       p. 130), individual autonomy (Keats Citron, 2019, p. 131), and democracy (Whit-
       ney & Simpson, 2019, p. 44). However, rather than developing new justifications
       for free speech, these and other authors aim to establish, first, whether and in what
       way various forms of (online) speech may deserve prima facie protection based on
       these traditional justifications (without revising or critically assessing them) and,
       second, whether there might be other reasons why that protection may sometimes
       be denied, for example if and when certain instances of speech cause harm to others,
       especially members of vulnerable minorities—a point that social justice movements
       often highlight.                                      
       The free speech arguments under conditions of social change
                                                             
       All of the three main arguments for free speech rest, sometimes implicitly, on cer-
       tain assumptions about the society in which free speech operates. These assump-
       tions are (a) limited social diversity; (b) the primacy of rationality; and (c) a low
       and slow information environment. Each of these assumptions, we argue, has been
       undermined by the social change processes discussed earlier, with important impli-
       cations for the legitimacy of free speech protection. However, we show that while
       the truth and autonomy arguments for free speech are weakened as a result of the
       social change processes that we analyse, the democracy argument is strengthened
       as it is the only one that anticipates and indeed incorporates the prospect of social
       change.                                               
                                                             
       Limited social diversity                              
                                                             
       Mill famously endorsed the importance of individuals embracing a variety of life-
       styles or ‘experiments of living’, a point that is central to his broader defence of indi-
       vidual liberty. And Victorian England, the historical period during which Mill was
       writing, certainly presented significant class differences. But there was more limited
       social diversity at that time than there is in contemporary liberal democracies today,
       particularly since WWII.                              
         One factor that has contributed to this social change has been the influx into many
       Western countries of migrants from their former colonies, which has resulted in the
       growing diversification of Western societies in terms of ethnicity, race, and religion,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 679
                                                             
       compounding older (and in some cases weakening) class cleavages. This diversifica-
       tion has been accompanied by an increase in political, economic, and social power
       imbalances. Liberal democracies are nowadays inhabited by more people who are
       consciously ‘outsiders’ from the mainstream experience, including not only immi-
       grants and ethnic minorities but also Indigenous people, women, LGTBIQ+ peo-
       ple, and other historically marginalized groups. The limited social diversity assump-
       tion has also been undermined by growing individualism, which has intensified the
       emphasis on self-expression and personal identity.    
         Greater social diversity can have important implications for the legitimacy of free
       speech protection based on the truth argument. For example, truth may still be val-
       ued in twenty-first-century liberal democracies, but it now conflicts more often with
       other values that people in these societies also cherish, such as tradition, community,
       racial equity, social harmony, and the protection of vulnerable minorities. Under
       such circumstances it is not clear why the process of truth discovery should always
       take precedence over other values. Consider, for example, Holocaust denial. Accord-
       ing to Schauer (2012), allowing people to freely express and spread this longstand-
       ing anti-Semitic conspiracy theory just because, as Mill’s argument seems to imply,
       confronting this view would result in a better understanding of the historical truth
       about the Holocaust, might not only potentially have significant epistemic costs—
       i.e. more people may actually believe this view despite its falsity—but also nega-
       tive non-epistemic consequences, i.e. higher levels of anti-Semitism with resulting
       greater harms for Jewish people and reduced social harmony. It is not clear, there-
       fore, why truth-discovery should be regarded as a decisive source of legitimacy of
       (i.e. a public reason for) free speech protection.    
         Like the truth argument, the autonomy argument also seems to presuppose
       low levels of social diversity in liberal democracies. Indeed several of the earliest
       accounts of autonomy and free speech in the 1970s and 1980s debated pornography
       (e.g. Dworkin, 1981; Scanlon, 1972), and their understanding of diversity was often
       limited to the divide between pornographers and consumers of pornography, on
       the one hand, and those who would like to protect society’s traditional values from
       pornography’s ‘immoral’ influence, on the other hand—in other words, the divide
       between liberals and conservatives.                   
         This approach seems to neglect or at least downplay the degree of social diver-
       sity that now characterizes these societies. True, greater individualism may have
       strengthened the commitment to autonomy among many people. But social diver-
       sification has also challenged autonomy in significant ways. From the political lib-
       eral standpoint that underlies our analysis, it has become a more controversial value
       and, for this reason, it cannot provide the basis for public reasons to justify govern-
       ment rules. More specifically, there are now more (and more diverse) understand-
       ings of what it means to be autonomous in contemporary societies than there were in
       the past (see, e.g. Brison, 1998). Furthermore, some people might even completely
       reject the notion that autonomy should be central to their conception of human flour-
       ishing (Cohen, 1993; Parekh, 2006) or that it should always be prioritized over other
       values. And even those who endorse autonomy (regardless of which specific concep-
       tion) may point out that its exercise should be ascribed to not just one category of
       people. For example, women as well as members of ethnic and religious minorities

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       680                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       and other vulnerable groups also have a right to autonomous agency, and this may
       necessitate the regulation of some forms of expression such as pornography and hate
       speech which, while allegedly advancing the autonomous agency of speakers, hinder
       that of listeners or bystanders who belong to those groups (see, e.g. Langton, 1990;
       Rostbøll, 2009).                                      
         Perhaps, even before the processes of social diversification gained momentum,
       autonomy was never a widely endorsed value, capable of providing public reasons
       for free speech protection (or for any type of legislation). But social diversification
       has exacerbated disagreement about this value, which may now more often than in
       the past come into conflict with (and not always be prioritized over) other values that
       are widely shared in liberal democracies, such as gender equality, equal dignity, and
       social harmony (see Bonotti & Seglow, 2021). Indeed, public reason requires not
       only that we appeal to shared values when justifying political rules but also that we
       provide a reasonable balance of such values when two or more of them are at stake
       (Quong, 2011; Rawls, 2005). Overly prioritizing one shared value over others at all
       times would contravene this prerequisite.             
         Like the truth and autonomy arguments, the democracy argument for free speech
       was originally formulated at a time when liberal democracies presented a lower level
       of social diversity. Meiklejohn, writing shortly after WWII, used the example of
       New England town hall meetings to show that democracy requires the free expres-
       sion of ideas and arguments among equals—but that example belonged to a society
       that was predominantly white, Anglophone and Protestant. Most liberal democratic
       societies resembled this model until the 1980s when, as we have seen, migratory
       processes accelerated dramatically, especially movements from developing countries
       to a small group of advanced industrialized (and mostly Western) countries. Fur-
       thermore, the societies in which the democracy argument for free speech was first
       advanced were dominated by materialist worldviews and thus economic and physi-
       cal security concerns. These priorities, we explained earlier, were supplanted by a
       greater emphasis on such values as autonomy, self-expression, and identity start-
       ing from the 1960 s and 1970s. But, unlike with the truth and autonomy arguments,
       these social changes have not undermined the democracy argument for free speech
       and may in fact have strengthened it.                 
         First of all, as liberal democratic societies have become more culturally, ethni-
       cally, religiously, and linguistically diverse, the problem of how to make collective
       decisions has become more acute. Disagreements emanate not only from increased
       diversity but also from the mixed reactions to it by long-established populations,
       creating new axes of division centred on immigration. Growing economic inequal-
       ity in many liberal democracies in recent decades has also worsened the challenge
       of collective decision-making, and the risk that large segments of the population
       will be alienated. Under these changing circumstances, the argument for democracy,
       and for protecting free speech in order to sustain democratic processes and insti-
       tutions, has become stronger. Furthermore, social diversity—and the challenges it
       poses to collective decision-making—has been compounded by the greater diffusion
       of individualist goals such as self-expression, autonomy, and creativity, thus mak-
       ing democracy even more attractive as a collective decision-making mechanism and
       encouraging democratic institutions to be more responsive to citizens.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 681
                                                             
         At this point, though, one might counter that democracy has become a more con-
       troversial value in contemporary liberal democracies, in much the same way that
       truth has. The phenomenon of ‘democratic backsliding’ (Haggard & Kaufman,
       2021; Levitsky & Ziblatt, 2018; Wolkenstein, 2023), manifested in (and alimented
       by) such diverse phenomena as populism and cultural conservatism, would seem
       to support this claim. Yet, as recent scholarship has suggested (Cianetti & Hanley,
       2021), what we are witnessing is not a move away from democracy but rather a
       tension and trade-off between different democratic values, i.e. ‘populist’ democratic
       majoritarianism vs. a ‘liberal’ commitment to democratic constitutionalism and the
       rule of law (Cianetti & Hanley, 2021, p. 73).         
         Furthermore, recent comparative work shows that support for democracy in
       general has been rising around the world, even in countries that have experienced
       democratic backsliding (Treisman, 2023). This evidence suggests that while there
       might have been a decline in democratic practice, democracy continues to be widely
       endorsed as a value.                                  
       The primacy of rationality                            
                                                             
       Mill developed his moral and political philosophy alongside contributions to sci-
       entific methodology, where he advocated a strong form of positivism, particularly
       in his 1843 book A System of Logic (see Robson, 2011). Among the claims advanced
       in that book was the belief that scientific progress followed objective and observ-
       able laws. There tends to be a progression of knowledge from religion and super-
       stition through metaphysics and abstract thinking to positive, empirically grounded
       science. This depiction of the development of the natural sciences, grounded in the
       primacy of rationality, contributed to the dominance of positivism in several of the
       social sciences by the late twentieth century, and underlies Mill’s free speech the-
       orizing. Yet this view faces some serious challenges as a result of social change.
       One challenge emerges from the increasing attractiveness of post-truth arguments
       (to many in liberal democratic societies), as discussed in the previous section. It has
       become clear that many people in liberal democracies are doubtful of the claims of
       scientific experts and even the possibility of objective truth in core matters of social
       science. Examining the Millian truth argument from the post-truth vantage point,
       there seems to be little chance that free speech can advance ‘truth’ for the simple but
       fundamental reason that this objective is not possible. ‘Truth’ cannot be advanced
       when, as post-truth advocates argue, it does not exist. At this point, one might object
       that while agreement on a shared ‘thick’ conception of truth might be absent in lib-
       eral democratic societies, a ‘thin’ conception of truth is indeed shared (either explic-
       itly or implicitly) by all citizens, including those who defend post-truth positions. As
       Joshua Cohen points out, ‘[t]ruth is so closely connected with intuitive notions of
       thinking, asserting, believing, judging and reasoning that it is difficult to understand
       what leaving it behind amounts to’ (Cohen, 2009, p. 15). Without something like the
       concept of a right or best or true answer, it would be very hard to see why people
       would want to (and how they could) engage in any exchange of reasons. However, it
       is plausible to argue that even a thin notion of truth is controversial in contemporary
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       682                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       liberal democracies, given the ‘assault on reality’ that is central to what Nancy
       Rosenblum and Russell Muirhead call ‘new conspiracism’. As they explain,
         [t]he new conspiracism strikes at what we think of as truth and the grounds
         of truth. It strikes at what it means to know something. The new conspira-
         cism seeks to replace evidence, argument, and shared grounds of understand-
         ing with convoluted conjurings and bare assertions (Muirhead & Rosenblum,
         2019, p. 9).                                        
         But even if, following Cohen, one accepted that a thin conception of truth is
       indeed widely shared in a liberal democratic society, it is not clear that this concep-
       tion would be sufficient to justify free speech protection. The thin conception only
       seems to provide the epistemic guidelines that those engaging in the exercise of free
       speech through the exchange of reasons must rely on, whereas a defence of freedom
       of speech would seem to require a thicker conception of truth tied to a substantive
       (and, for that reason, controversial) comprehensive doctrine such as Mill’s (Bonotti,
       2015).                                                
         The post-truth critique poses a frontal challenge to free speech as a truth-gener-
       ating mechanism. But the truth argument, and particularly its primacy of rational-
       ity premise, is also challenged by growing awareness of cognitive biases. The fact
       that people do not, and generally cannot, think in a balanced, systematic, and inde-
       pendent way introduces a new set of obstacles into the truth-generating process. And
       although, in recent decades, societies have learned how group decision-making can
       be designed to offset some of these individual-level cognitive biases (Grossman,
       2021), Mill’s truth argument rests on the idea that free speech is only valuable inso-
       far as people qua individuals employ their deliberative faculties and critical reason-
       ing during the process of truth discovery (Brink, 2008). Cognitive biases undermine
       this goal, even if their effects can be remedied at a collective level.
         The primacy of rationality assumption also underlies, and undermines, the auton-
       omy argument for free speech. For example, in her influential book Against Auton-
       omy, Sarah Conly (2012) draws on evidence from social psychology and behav-
       ioural economics to argue that since people often act irrationally and in ways that
       undermine their own goals, the state can legitimately interfere with their autono-
       mous choices in order to help them realize those goals. While Conly does not focus
       specifically on free speech, her critique of autonomy-based arguments against state
       paternalism also has implications for how governments should deal with speech that
       undermines rational (or exploits irrational) behaviour. Free speech theorists also
       give this issue some attention, showing for example how certain types of speakers,
       such as pornographers (Scanlon, 1979) or hate speakers (Brown, 2015a, 2015b), can
       exploit audiences’ irrational cognitive biases rather than promoting their autono-
       mous faculties and critical reasoning. But even in the absence of deliberate manipu-
       lation, individuals may still be influenced by various forms of irrational cognitive
       biases when they read, listen to and/or act upon the speech they are presented with.
       This would seem to reduce the rationale for respecting their sphere of individual
       autonomy (procedural conception) or, more significantly, their flourishing as auton-
       omous speakers or listeners (substantive conception), since that flourishing depends
       on their critical reflection and their capacity to achieve this.

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 683
                                                             
         Like the truth and autonomy arguments, the democracy argument for free
       speech, at least in its original formulations, was grounded in the idea of individu-
       als as rational actors, an assumption that took root in the 1960s and prevailed in
       democratic theory (and political theory more broadly) until the 1970s and 1980s
       (see, e.g. Downs, 1957; Green & Shapiro, 1994). However, our growing aware-
       ness of the cognitive biases that invalidate the model of individual rationality
       also seems to undermine the assumptions underlying classic formulations of the
       democracy argument for free speech. Furthermore, especially when tied to the
       idea of deliberation, the democracy argument also seems to presuppose, at least,
       a minimal conception of truth based on which—as noted earlier—citizens can
       engage in ‘thinking, asserting, believing, judging and reasoning’ (Cohen, 2009, p.
       15). But this might be challenged by the aforementioned new conspiracism, with
       its rejection of the fundamental standards of truth.  
         Yet, once again, we believe that the democracy argument, unlike the truth
       and autonomy arguments, has not been weakened by this social change. Indeed,
       democratic theorists have long debated the question of whether citizens think
       rationally, and whether this is required for effective democracy (Boudreau, 2009;
       Brennan, 2016). An argument put forward in this debate is the notion that democ-
       racy can function well despite a high level of civic ignorance in the population.
       For instance, democracy has been presented as primarily an elite activity (Sar-
       tori, 1976, 1987), or dependent on a small group of ‘attentive citizens’ (Almond,
       1950), which means that a widespread lack of sophistication and, along similar
       lines, some degree of anti-truth sentiment, do not necessarily translate into sys-
       temic problems. Indeed, taking this line of argument to its extreme, Almond and
       Verba (1963) argued that a substantially passive and unsophisticated citizenry
       may provide a more democratically conducive environment than one where most
       citizens are active and informed. In the latter context, politicians must operate
       under a tight leash (i.e. extreme accountability and transparency), limiting their
       capacity to make responsible, long-term decisions and stymieing opportunities
       for welfare-enhancing bargains among partisan rivals (see also Bardi et al., 2014).
       If, as these accounts suggest, successful democracy does not depend on a popula-
       tion of rational citizens, then it follows that the democratic case for free speech is
       not imperilled by our increasing awareness that most people do not think ration-
       ally most of the time.                                
         But even if we reject this view and accept that democracy does require rational
       citizens, democratic structures and processes can compensate for the problem
       of pervasive non-rationality. In particular, as we explained earlier, deliberative
       democracy is widely considered to be preferable to its non-deliberative alterna-
       tives because it contributes to better decision-making by helping to pool infor-
       mation, correct biases and logical fallacies, and encourage a diversity of per-
       spectives. And there is now also emerging experimental evidence showing that
       democratic deliberation has the capacity to attenuate the threat posed by disin-
       formation and post-truth sentiment to collective decision-making (Himmelroos &
       Rapeli, 2020), and therefore to work effectively despite the existence of wide-
       spread cognitive biases and conspiracist attitudes.   

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       684                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
       Low and slow information environment                  
                                                             
       Our increasing awareness of cognitive limitations also poses another challenge to
       the truth argument for free speech, this time due to the technology-driven informa-
       tion explosion. The truth argument has traditionally been expounded in contexts,
       such as Victorian England or the pre-Internet era, where citizens had not only less
       information to process than they do today, but also more time to do so before being
       confronted with new information that could cause them to update their initial prefer-
       ences and opinions.                                   
         Defenders of the autonomy argument for free speech, as with the truth argument,
       generally assume that isolated readers and audience members could easily process
       information, remain in control of it, and thus engage in information exchanges with
       others that are reasonably balanced and reciprocal. However, the contemporary
       information environment (and especially the scale and speed of information flow)
       has significantly reduced individuals’ ability to process the information needed to
       exercise their agency and autonomy. This is the case even if we set aside the issues
       concerning cognitive biases that we highlighted earlier. Furthermore, as a result of
       this social change, information exchanges nowadays tend to be more disempower-
       ing and dominating (and less balanced and reciprocal) than they were in the past,
       partly due to the growing power asymmetries that we highlighted earlier. Uncon-
       strained free speech, as manifested in the unconstrained circulation of information,
       can therefore undermine rather than promote the autonomy of individuals who find
       themselves in subordinate social positions.           
         Like the truth and autonomy arguments, the democracy argument for free speech
       was also initially formulated, and subsequently developed, in societies character-
       ized by low and slow circulation of information, especially during the pre-Internet
       era. How has informational overload due to technological advancements affected the
       democracy argument?                                   
         Technology can enhance the mechanisms through which free speech fosters
       democracy. For instance, the explosion of Internet platforms, both informational
       and social, provides new and more effective ways for citizens to engage in demo-
       cratic deliberation. True, while technology can bolster the capacity of free speech to
       support democracy, it can also introduce impediments into the democratic process.
       The quality of substantive democracy may be affected if the expansion of informa-
       tion resources is not matched by effective ways to search and sort this information.
       And from a procedural standpoint, the combination of cutting-edge communication
       technology and free speech creates new risks of interference in, and manipulation
       of, democratic processes. However, democracy, especially in its deliberative variety,
       can provide the resources for countering the threats posed by the information explo-
       sion. As recent empirical evidence has shown (Ercan et al., 2019, p. 32), delibera-
       tive democracy can provide an antidote to information explosion or ‘communicative
       plenty’, through the design of ‘opportunities for, and spaces of, reflection and listen-
       ing’ (see also Dryzek & Tanasoca, 2021).              
         Our conclusions in this and previous subsections do not imply, of course, that
       (deliberative) democracy itself might not be potentially imperilled by the social
       changes that we have highlighted. Indeed, social change poses a serious challenge

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 685
                                                             
       to the defence of free speech on any grounds. The democracy argument does not
       escape this test, but the collective decision-making mechanisms that are central to
       democratic institutions confer to this argument a kind of resilience that the more
       individualistic truth and autonomy arguments lack.    
                                                             
       Conclusion                                            
                                                             
       In this paper, we have reassessed the three traditional arguments for free speech—
       based on truth, autonomy, and democracy—while taking account of the effects
       of social change. More specifically, we have argued that social change in its vari-
       ous manifestations has produced markedly different contexts from those in which
       these arguments were first developed. The truth and autonomy arguments have
       been especially affected as a result, while the democracy argument may well have
       been strengthened. Our goal has been not only to re-evaluate the arguments for free
       speech but also to show, through that analysis, that the protection of free speech
       (especially in a constitution) needs to be relegitimized for modern liberal democ-
       racy. This process should occur through a ‘public reason test’ that includes the eval-
       uation of the empirical assumptions that underlie and/or accompany the arguments
       for free speech.                                      
         We acknowledge that someone might criticize our analysis by pointing out that
       the truth, autonomy, and democracy justifications for free speech are not independ-
       ent of one another. If that is the case and if, as we argued, the former two argu-
       ments fail to offer a justification for free speech protection that withstands social
       change, then the democracy argument is affected by this failure too. For example, it
       may be argued that citizens need true information in order to engage in democratic
       deliberation, or that they need to autonomously consider issues for themselves in
       order to participate in that process. We do not deny these points, and indeed there
       are well-documented interconnections between the three arguments for free speech
       (see Bonotti & Seglow, 2021, pp. 28–30). However, the democracy argument only
       requires a thin conception of truth (i.e. a conception that can help us establish what
       counts as a right or best or true answer), but not the kind of thick conception of
       truth, tied to a substantive (and, for that reason, controversial) conception of indi-
       vidual flourishing and well-being, which underlies Mill’s argument for free speech
       (Bonotti, 2015; Brink, 2008).3 Therefore, failures affecting the truth argument do not
       extend to the democracy justification for free speech. When it comes to the auton-
       omy argument, although democratic deliberation does depend on individual citizens
       using their deliberative faculties to autonomously evaluate any issues at stake, we
       have seen that it can also benefit from the collective wisdom that deliberation gener-
       ates, and which can help overcome those irrational cognitive biases that autonomous
       3 We acknowledge that the extent to which this may be the case partly depends on the variety of deliber-
       ative democracy one considers. In this sense, epistemic defences of deliberative democracy may rely on a
       thicker conception of truth than procedural defences (e.g. see Min & Wong, 2018) although, we believe,
       not as thick as the conception of truth that underlies Mill’s argument, which is tied to a substantive con-
       ception of individual flourishing.                    
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       686                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       individuals alone cannot overcome. Therefore, failures affecting the autonomy argu-
       ment do not extend to the democracy justification for free speech.
         Furthermore, due to space constraints, in this paper we could only focus on the
       general or most prominent versions of the truth and autonomy arguments. How-
       ever, we recognize that there are subtypes or adjacent versions of both arguments
       which may better withstand social change. In the case of the autonomy argument,
       for example, these include the ideas of ‘partial agency’ (Abrams, 1999) and ‘dig-
       nity’ (Grimm, 2021), both of which are closely linked to autonomy. These views
       constitute alternatives that speak to the underlying ideas expressed in the autonomy
       defence of free speech while addressing some of the main critiques of the autonomy
       argument, particularly its overly individualistic foundations that often neglect struc-
       tural forms of oppression and harms targeting already vulnerable groups, phenom-
       ena that have been compounded by social change. Careful consideration of these and
       similar variations of the truth and autonomy arguments should be central to future
       research as it could help in the formulation of the best possible versions of these
       arguments to deal with social change.                 
         Finally, we also acknowledge that our analysis in this paper has focused on a
       small subset of high-income liberal democracies in North America, Western Europe,
       and Oceania. Future work along the lines that we have developed here could there-
       fore examine, for instance, social changes (e.g. urbanization and democratization)
       that are particularly relevant to liberal democracies beyond that subset (e.g. middle-
       and low-income liberal democracies and/or liberal democracies which are located
       outside those regions). This research would provide new angles on the central argu-
       ment of this paper—that the legitimacy of the rules protecting free speech needs to
       be reconsidered as societies change over time.        
       Acknowledgements We presented earlier versions of this paper at the Monash University Politics and
       International Relations Seminar Series (May 2021) and at the KU Leuven Free Speech and Its Limits
       Seminar (November 2021). We are grateful to Eleanor Gordon, Eszter Kollar, Helder De Schutter, Paul
       Muldoon, Antoon Vandevelde, Philippe Van Parijs, and audiences at both events for their very helpful
       feedback. We would also like to thank two anonymous reviewers and the editors of Contemporary Politi-
       cal Theory for their useful comments and suggestions. 
       Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
       use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
       sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
       licenses/by/4.0/.                                     
       References                                            
       Abrams, K. (1999) From autonomy to agency: Feminist perspectives on self-direction. William & Mary
         Law Review 805: 805–846.                            
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 687
                                                             
       Almond, G.A. (1950) The American people and foreign policy. Harcourt Brace.
       Almond, G.A. and Verba, S. (1963) The civic culture. Princeton University Press.
       Arendt, H. (1968) Truth and politics. Between past and future. revised. Viking Press, pp. 227–264.
       Baker, C.E. (2011) Autonomy and free speech. Constitutional Commentary 27(2): 251–280.
       Bardi, L., Bartolini, S. and Trechsel, A.H. (2014) Responsive and responsible? The role of parties in
         twenty-first century politics. West European Politics 37(2): 235–252.
       Barendt, E. (2005) Freedom of speech. Oxford University Press.
       Benson, J. (2021) The epistemic value of deliberative democracy: How far can diversity take us? Syn-
         these 199: 8257–8279.                               
       Bonotti, M. (2015) Political liberalism, free speech and public reason. European Journal of Political The-
         ory 14(2): 180–208.                                 
       Bonotti, M. and Seglow, J. (2021) Free speech. Polity.
       Boudreau, C. (2009) Making citizens smart: When do institutions improve unsophisticated citizens’ deci-
         sions? Political Behavior 31(2): 287–306.           
       Brink, D. (2008). Mill’s liberal principles and freedom of expression. In C. L. Ten (ed.) Mill’s on liberty:
         A critical guide. Cambridge University Press, pp. 40–61.
       Brennan, J. (2016) Against democracy. Princeton University Press.
       Brison, S.J. (1998) The autonomy defence of free speech. Ethics 108(2): 312–339.
       Brison, S.J. and Gelber, K. (eds.) (2019) Free speech in the digital age. Oxford University Press.
       Brown, A. (2015a) Hate speech law: A philosophical examination. Routledge.
       Brown, W. (2015b) Undoing the demos: Neoliberalism’s stealth revolution. Zone Books.
       Castles, S. (2002) Migration and community formation under conditions of globalization. International
         Migration Review 36(4): 1143–1168.                  
       Chambers, S. (2021) Truth, deliberative democracy, and the virtues of accuracy: Is fake news destroying
         the public sphere? Political Studies 69(1): 147–163.
       Cianetti, L. and Hanley, S. (2021) The end of the backsliding paradigm. The Journal of Democracy 32(1):
         66–80.                                              
       Cohen, J. (1993) Freedom of expression. Philosophy and Public Affairs 22(3): 207–263.
       Cohen, J. (2009) Truth and public reason. Philosophy & Public Affairs 37(1): 2–42.
       Conly, S. (2012) Against autonomy. Cambridge University Press.
       Davis, M. (2021) The online anti-public sphere. European Journal of Cultural Studies 24(1): 143–159.
       Downs, A. (1957) An economic theory of democracy. Addison Wesley.
       Dryzek, J. and Tanasoca, A. (2021) Democratizing global justice: Deliberating global goals. Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
       Dworkin, R. (1981) Is there a right to pornography? Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 1(2): 177–212.
       Dworkin, R. (2009) Foreword. In I. Hare and J. Weinstein (eds.) Extreme speech and democracy. Oxford
         University Press, pp. v–ix.                         
       Emerson, T.L. (1962) Toward a general theory of the first amendment. Yale Law Journal 72: 877.
       Ercan, S., Hendriks, C.M. and Dryzek, J.S. (2019) Public deliberation in an era of communicative plenty.
         Policy & Politics 47(1): 19–35.                     
       Fishkin, J., Siu, A., Diamond, L. and Bradburn, N. (2021) Is deliberation an antidote to extreme parti-
         san polarization? Reflections on ‘America in one room.’ American Political Science Review 115(4):
         1464–1481.                                          
       Fiss, O.M. (1986) Free speech and social structure. Iowa Law Review 71(5): 1405–1426.
       Flanders, C.W. (2012) The mutability of public reason. Ratio Juris 25(2): 180–205.
       Flanders, C.W. (2014) Public reason and animal rights. In D. Schlossberg and M. Wissenburg (eds.)
         Political animals and animal politics. Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 44–57.
       Green, D.P. and Shapiro, I. (1994) Pathologies of rational choice: A critique of applications in political
         science. Yale University Press.                     
       Grimm, D. (2021) Freedom of speech and human dignity. In A. Stone and F. Schauer (eds.) The Oxford
         handbook of freedom of speech. Oxford University Press, pp. 106–117.
       Grossman, M. (2021) How social science got better: Overcoming bias with more evidence, diversity, and
         self-reflection. Oxford University Press.           
       Haggard, S. and Kaufman, R. (2021) Backsliding: Democratic regress in the contemporary world. Cam-
         bridge University Press.                            
       Heinze, E. (2018a). Karl Marx’s theory of free speech—Part 1’. Humanity, 31 May. http:// human ityjo
         urnal. org/ blog/ karl- marxs- theory- of- free- speech- part-1/

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       688                                  M. Bonotti, Z. Nwokora
                                                             
       Heinze, E. (2018b). Karl Marx’s theory of free speech—Part 2’. Humanity, 1 June. http:// human ityjo
         urnal. org/ blog/ karl- marxs- theory- of- free- speech- part-2/
       Himmelroos, S. and Rapeli, L. (2020) Can deliberation reduce political misperceptions? Findings from a
         deliberative experiment on immigration. Journal of Deliberative Democracy 16(1): 58–66.
       Hong, L. and Page, S. (2004) Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform groups of high-ability
         problem solvers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 101(46):
         16385–16389.                                        
       Inglehart, R. [1977] (2016). The silent revolution: Changing values and political styles among western
         publics. Princeton University Press.                
       Inglehart, R. and Welzel, C. (2005) Modernization, cultural change, and democracy: The human develop-
         ment sequence. Cambridge University Press.          
       Kant, I. [1784] (1996) An answer to the question: What is enlightenment? In M.J. Gregor (ed.) Practical
         philosophy. Cambridge University Press.             
       Keats Citron, D. (2019) Restricting speech to protect it. In S. J. Brison and K. Gelber (eds.) Free speech
         in the digital age. Oxford University Press, pp. 122–136.
       Kymlicka, W. (1995) Multicultural citizenship: A liberal theory of minority rights. Clarendon Press.
       Landemore, H. and Elster, J. (2012) Collective wisdom: Principles and mechanism. Cambridge Univer-
         sity Press.                                         
       Langton, R. (1990) Whose right? Ronald Dworkin, women, and pornographers. Philosophy and Public
         Affairs 19(4): 311–359.                             
       Langton, R. (1993) Speech acts and unspeakable acts. Philosophy and Public Affairs 22(4): 293–330.
       Langton, R. (2009) Sexual solipsism: Philosophical essays on pornography and objectification. Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Levitsky, S. and Ziblatt, D. (2018) How democracies die. Crown.
       Lyotard, J.-F. (1984) The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. University of Minnesota Press.
       McGinnis, J. (2013) Accelerating democracy: Transforming governance through technology. Princeton
         University Press.                                   
       McGowan, M. K. (2019) Just words: On speech and hidden harm. Oxford University Press.
       Mckinnon, C. (2007) Should we tolerate Holocaust denial? Res Publica 13: 9–28.
       Meiklejohn, A. (1948) Free speech and its relation to self-government. Harper & Brothers.
       Mill, J.S. [1859] (2006) On liberty. In A. Ryan (ed.) On liberty and the subjection of women. Penguin
         Classics, pp. 7-129.                                
       Min, J.B. and Wong, J.K. (2018) Epistemic approaches to deliberative democracy. Philosophy Compass
         13(6): e12497.                                      
       Muirhead, R., & Rosenblum, N. L. (2019). A lot of people are saying: The new conspiracism and the
         assault on democracy. Princeton University Press.   
       Norris, P. and Inglehart, R. (2019) Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and Authoritarian populism. Cam-
         bridge University Press.                            
       Nwokora, Z. (2022) Constitutional design for dynamic democracies: A framework for analysis. Interna-
         tional Journal of Constitutional Law 20(2): 580–610.
       O’Flynn, I. (2021) Deliberative democracy. Polity.    
       Page, S. (2007) The difference. Princeton University Press.
       Parekh, B. (2006) Rethinking multiculturalism: Cultural diversity and political theory (second edition).
         Palgrave Macmillan.                                 
       Post, R. (2011) Participatory democracy and free speech. Virginia Law Review 97(3): 477–489.
       Post, R. C. (2019) Privacy, speech, and the digital imagination. In S. J. Brison and K. Gelber (eds.) Free
         speech in the digital age. Oxford University Press, pp. 104–121.
       Quong, J. (2011) Liberalism without perfection. Oxford University Press.
       Rawls, J. (2005) Political liberalism. Columbia University Press.
       Redish, M.H. (1982) The value of free speech. University of Pennsylvania Law Review 130(3): 591–645.
       Robson, J.M. (ed.) (2011) Collected works of John Stuart Mill, vol. vii: System of logic: Ratiocinative and
         inductive. Routledge.                               
       Rostbøll, C. (2009) Autonomy, respect and arrogance in the Danish cartoon controversy. Political Theory
         37(5): 370–396.                                     
       Sartori, G. (1976) Parties and party systems: A framework of analysis. Cambridge University Press.
       Sartori, G. (1987) The theory of democracy revisited. Chatham House Publishers.
       Scanlon, T.M. (1972) A theory of freedom of expression. Philosophy & Public Affairs 1(2): 204–226.

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free speech and social change: a public reason approach 689
                                                             
       Scanlon, T.M. (1979) Freedom of expression and categories of expression. University of Pittsburgh Law
         Review 40(4): 519–550.                              
       Schauer, F. (1983) Free speech: A philosophical inquiry. Cambridge University Press.
       Schauer, F. (2012) Social epistemology, Holocaust denial, and the post-Millian calculus. In M. Herz
         and P. Molnar (eds.) The Content and context of hate speech: Rethinking regulation and responses.
         Cambridge University Press, pp. 129–144.            
       Shiffrin, S.V. (2014) Speech matters: On lying, morality, and the law. Princeton University Press.
       Simpson, R. (2020) The relation between academic freedom and free speech. Ethics 130(3): 287–319.
       Solum, L.B. (1996) Novel public reasons. Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review 29: 1459–1485.
       Sunstein, C.R. (1993) Democracy and the problem of free speech. The Free Press.
       Sweet, K. (2024) Kant on free speech: Criticism, enlightenment, and the exercise of judgement in the
         public sphere. Kantian Review 29(1): 61–80.         
       Thaler, R.H. and Sunstein, C.R. (2008) Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness.
         Yale University Press.                              
       Treisman, D. (2023) How great is the current danger to democracy? Assessing the risk with historical
         data. Comparative Political Studies 56(12): 1924–1952.
       Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1974) Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science 185
         (4157): 1124–1131.                                  
       Vertovec, S. (2007) Super-diversity and its implications. Ethnic and Racial Studies 30(6): 1024–1054.
       Waldron, J. (1993) Religious contributions in public deliberation. San Diego Law Review 30: 837–848.
       Waldron, J. (2012) The harm in hate speech. Harvard University Press.
       Weinstein, J. (2011) Participatory democracy as the central value of American free speech doctrine. Vir-
         ginia Law Review 97(3): 491–514.                    
       White, J. and Ypi, L. (2016) The meaning of partisanship. Oxford University Press.
       Whitney, H.M. Simpson, R.M. (2019) Search engines and free speech coverage. In S. J. Brison and K.
         Gelber (eds.) Free speech in the digital age. Oxford University Press, pp. 33–51.
       Williams, S.H. (2009) Feminist theory and freedom of speech. Indiana Law Journal 84(3): 999–1013.
       Wolkenstein, F. (2023) What is democratic backsliding? Constellations 30(3): 261–275.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Matteo Bonotti is an Associate Professor of Politics and International Relations at Monash University
       in Melbourne. His research interests include democratic theory, political liberalism and public reason,
       linguistic justice, free speech and civility, and food justice. His work has appeared in journals such as
       the American Political Science Review, the Journal of Politics, the British Journal of Political Sci-
       ence, and Political Studies. He is the author of Partisanship and Political Liberalism in Diverse Socie-
       ties (OUP, 2017) and the co-author of Healthy Eating Policy and Political Philosophy: A Public Reason
       Approach (OUP, 2022) and Money, Parties, and Democracy: Political Finance Between Fat Cats and Big
       Government (OUP, 2022).                               
       Zim Nwokora is an Associate Professor of Politics and Policy Studies at Deakin University in Melbourne.
       He is a comparative political scientist whose research examines theoretical and empirical questions about
       political party systems, constitutional structures, democracy, and political finance. His work has appeared
       in journals such as the Australian Journal of Political Science, the Australian Journal of Politics and
       History, the British Journal of Political Science, Governance, the International Journal of Constitu-
       tional Law, Party Politics, Political Research Quarterly, and Political Studies. He is the co-author of
       Money, Parties, and Democracy: Political Finance Between Fat Cats and Big Government (OUP, 2022).
       His research has been discussed in media outlets such as ABC Radio, BBC World Service, and The
       Conversation.                                         