[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:877–880       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00771-y            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       What remains: the collected poems of Hannah Arendt    
                                                             
       Hannah Arendt. Samantha Rose Hill and Genese Grill (Trans. & eds.)
       New York, Liveright, 2025, xxxiii+172pp., ISBN: 978-1324090526
                                                             
       Ariel Yingqi Tang1                                    
                                                             
       Published online: 26 June 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       If thinking, in Hannah Arendt’s words, is to take place as a soundless dialogue with
       oneself (1978, p. 6), who would be the interlocutors that Arendt kept in her own
       company, and in what language did they speak? Composed between 1923 and 1961,
       Arendt’s poems assemble the fragments of an itinerant life punctuated by unspoken
       events and fate’s undue sentences, documenting her voyage in between wars, conti-
       nents, and languages. Samantha Rose Hill and Genese Grill render into English for
       the first time the seventy-one existing poems by Arendt spanning thirty-eight years.
       Read alongside the rest of Arendt’s corpus, this edition uncovers the poetic canvas
       of her political thinking while portraying a free spirit working actively across lin-
       guistic and stylistic confines. Among these pages, poetry and philosophy cease to
       be rivals, emblematizing the act of pluralistic thinking that brings Arendt’s political
       theory to life.                                       
         ‘What remains? [Was ist geblieben]?’ In her 1964 interview with Günter Gauss,
       Arendt famously responded to the question by describing one’s mother tongue as
       essential—the language is that which remains and which she persistently held onto
       throughout her life (2007, p. 63). Hill and Grill honor Arendt’s attachment to her
       mother language with the title of the book. Arranging side by side the German and
       English texts of each poem, they allow curious readers to recollect the rhymes lost
       and found in translation. While seeking to remain faithful to the original meaning,
       the two translators include concise annotations that help to ground the poems in lit-
       erary and historical contexts. What gets revealed is an Arendt in becoming, a thinker
       who, steeped in the poetic tradition of classicism and romanticism, playfully rein-
       vented the tropes and metaphors in light of her own personal encounters.
         In the introduction—a lyrical essay full of memorable facts and insightful obser-
       vations—Hill depicts Arendt as a poetic thinker for whom life and literature were
       never counterposed. Anglophone writers including Robert Lowell, W. H. Auden,
       and Randall Jarrell found themselves in close friendship and literary exchange with
       *                                                     
         Ariel Yingqi Tang                                   
         yqtang@stanford.edu                                 
       1 Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA        
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       878                                        A. Y. Tang 
                                                             
       Arendt, while fellow émigrés such as Hermann Broch kept alive their common
       heritage spelled in the verse of Goethe, Schiller, Novalis, and Rilke. Even though
       Arendt’s poems feature subject matters that are private by nature—which leads Hill
       to conclude that ‘her poetry is her private life’ (p. xv)—poetry was inseparable from
       Arendt’s social world. She seemed always to have an audience in mind, as was evi-
       dent from her self-collection of poems into two small volumes found in the Library
       of Congress by Hill in 2011.                          
         In what ways does poetry deepen our understanding of political thought? Accord-
       ing to Hill’s interpretation, Arendt’s poems evince a distinct mode of thinking—
       ’poetic thinking’ (p. xxi)—that remedies what Arendt herself identified as the flaws
       of ‘tyrannical thinking’ (2002, p. 45). Whereas tyrannical thinking involves the
       divorce of thinking from experience, resulting in moral and political apathy char-
       acteristic of many philosophers familiar to Arendt in Nazi Germany, poetic think-
       ing ‘allowed her to weave together thinking and experience’ (p. xxi). Compared to
       other forms of art, the work of poetry ‘remains closest to the thought that inspired
       it’ (1958, p. 169). It enables poets, and ‘poets alone’, to ‘bear the burden of truth in
       our world’ (p. xxiii). While Hill’s interpretation seems plausible, I wonder if Arendt
       herself would insist on the distinctiveness of poetry versus other genres of thinking,
       including political theory, as a medium for thought and experience. Is it possible to
       read Arendt’s poems as political theory, rather than its counterpart?
         One hint lies in Arendt’s decision not to write poems in English, which kept her
       at a wakeful distance from the new world that she gradually grew accustomed to.
       The choice of German as the language of poetry—first intuitive, then deliberate—
       was a habit turned into a willful act of commemoration. As if trying to compensate
       for the abrupt departure from her homeland, and to honor the friends who could not
       make it through the catastrophe of wartime violence, Arendt walked alongside them
       between these pages, exploring ways to ‘live with the dead [Hermann Broch]’ (pp.
       90, 91) and carry forward their [Walter Benjamin’s] voices (pp. 48, 49).
         The wounds of happiness                             
         Become stigmas, not scars.                          
         There would be no record,                           
         if your account                                     
         had not been imparted—                              
         poetic language                                     
         is a place, not a refuge                            
         (pp. 108-109).                                      
         Painfully aware of the privilege of escape, Arendt commanded the ‘poetic lan-
       guage [Gedichtes Wort]’ to speak for the speechless, tying in the hopeful joy of
       survival with the deepening cut of compunction—‘the wound of happiness/become
       stigmas, not scars’ (pp. 108, 109). For Arendt, poetry is more than a vessel for ‘fac-
       tual truth’ (p. xxv). It captures light as well as its shadow, recording nostalgia along-
       side hope.                                            
         Notably Arendt’s style grew more self-consciously abstract after she went
       into exile. Dividing the corpus into poems written before exile (1923–1926) and
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       What remains: the collected poems of Hannah Arendt 879
                                                             
       after (1942–1961), Hill and Grill carefully acknowledge the intervening years
       of exile that made poetry difficult. Writing in 1942, soon after arriving in the
       United States, Arendt suspended her earlier, naïve use of poetic language for
       intimate dialogue, and began to reflect sentimentally on the nature of language
       itself. ‘Poetic language/is a place [Stätte], not a refuge [Hort]’ (pp. 108, 109, 140,
       141). If language can be called home when one’s homeland has been laid to ruins,
       Arendt alerts us to the risk of unreflective reiteration. What remains—the idioms,
       tropes, and slogans—besides calling for preservation, also demands renovation.
       In this sense, to compose variations on the theme of classical and romantic poetry
       was to prepare the language for new beginnings, where muted voices and invis-
       ible experiences no longer need to hide.              
         In a passage titled ‘Plurality of Language’ [Pluralität der Sprachen], jotted
       down in her notebook in 1950, Arendt exposed the illusion of unifying human
       languages into one (2002, p. 42). Violence would be inevitable in the artificial
       attempt to impose certainty upon the ambiguous, for it is ‘against the human
       condition [gegen die »condition humaine«]’ (2002, p. 43). Thanks to the bilin-
       gual presentation of Arendt’s poetry in this edition, the plurality of language and
       thought that she so cherished is kept intact. Here poetry represents neither the
       basic ingredients for philosophy nor an elementary form of political theory to be
       superseded by discursive claims, but rather embodies the idea of plurality in a
       way unachievable by other genres. The pages now become a stage (p. xxvi), put-
       ting into play the script that later made its way into Arendt’s political treatises.
         Bookended by two poems featuring night and dream, Arendt’s poetic corpus
       traces no simple odyssey. Instead, it is pierced by her sober denial of the tempt-
       ing comfort of self-reconciliation.‘Blessed is he who has no home; he still sees it
       in his dreams’ (pp. 60, 61). Estrangement—both forced and chosen— reminded
       her of the impossibility to fully inhabit the place where one happens to settle and
       awakened her to the irreducible variety of human experience.
         When I consider my hand                             
         —A foreign thing related to me—                     
         I stand in no country,                              
         I am neither here nor there                         
         I am not certain of anything                        
         (pp. 24, 25).                                       
         The poetic Arendt was always speaking to someone else, even when the inter-
       locutor was her undecided self. The multiplicity of her inner voice readied her to
       listen to unfamiliar others and registered an aversion to conformism which flat-
       tens individuality. Years before she contended that ‘plurality is the condition of
       human action’ (1958, p. 8) in The Human Condition, Arendt had rehearsed the
       idea multiple times among these scattered lines.      
         Arendt’s poetic voice is private but not quiet, bringing forth a chorus of female
       diasporic authors who shared her vocabularies and sensibilities. Here and there
       one encounters a line echoing the phrases and images found in the works of Nelly
       Sachs (pp. 138, 139), Charlotte Beradt (pp. 80, 81), and Hilde Domin (pp. 8, 9).
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       880                                        A. Y. Tang 
                                                             
       In the community of female writers, Arendt’s solitude was guarded by many oth-
       ers, and her complaint of loneliness (pp. 96, 97)—even when unpublished—no
       longer remained in isolation.                         
         Speaking of the connection between politics and poetry, Arendt remarked that it
       was only upon learning the transience of all human actions that the Greeks began to
       ‘immortalize’ them through classical poetry (2002, p. 429). What Remains accom-
       plishes more than recording past events. Adding to the complex portrait of a con-
       temporary thinker, the edition further restores the literary landscape that gave rise
       to the intellectual horizon of Arendt’s generation, drawing the missing link between
       the age of enlightenment and twentieth-century political thought. For Arendt schol-
       ars and researchers of contemporary political theory, the book makes it possible to
       reexamine the established dichotomy between the public and private, philosophy
       and poetry, while prompting further inquiries into the politics of language, the task
       of translators, and the formation of knowledge in exile. A souvenir of what remains,
       this precious collection also reminds us of what would be missing when philosophi-
       cal thinking is severed from that which lies beyond.  
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Arendt, H. (1958) The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press.
       Arendt, H. (1978) The Life of the Mind. Harcourt, Inc.
       Arendt, H. (2002) Denktagebuch: 1950–1973. Piper Verlag.
       Arendt, H. (2007) Ich will verstehen: Selbstauskünfte zu Leben und Werk. Piper Verlag.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             