[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:897–900       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00770-z            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Democracy despite itself: liberal constitutionalism   
       and militant democracy                                
                                                             
       Benjamin A. Schupmann Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2024, 256
       pp., ISBN 9780192873026                               
                                                             
       András Sajó1                                          
                                                             
       Published online: 29 June 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       In 2012, Danny Oppenheimer and Mike Edwards published a book with the same
       title as the volume by Benjamin Schupmann. They argued that notwithstanding all
       the shortcomings of democracy, notwithstanding irrationality and bounded rational-
       ity, institutional devices are capable of maintaining democracy as the best available
       system of government. Twelve years later Benjamin Schupmann bets on militant
       democracy, a set of suspect and even dangerous measures that many scholars find
       hardly compatible with democracy as popular government. After all, as Schupmann
       admits, militant democracy restricts the choices that are at the heart of democracy
       and entails a set of measures that run the risk of turning into abuse and oppression,
       turning democracy into tyranny by democratic means.   
         To overcome the intellectual reluctance and practical reservations that para-
       lyze militant democracy, Schupmann offers a much needed justification of militant
       democracy, based on liberal political philosophy. He combines John Rawls’ ideas
       with certain critical concerns of Carl Schmitt. This sounds like ‘a chance meeting of
       a sewing machine and an umbrella on a dissecting table’ (de Lautréamont, 1994 p.
       193). As it happens, this encounter results in creative tension.
         In Schupmann’s understanding, militant democracy serves to protect democracy
       against legal revolution, in which ‘democratically elected actors use their legal pos-
       session of state power to subvert democratic essentials’ (p. 1). Schupmann intends
       to apply his concept to ’illiberal democracies’ such as Hungary, India, and Turkey
       (ch. 1). His extended concept of militant democracy differs in fundamental ways
       from an electoral takeover of power by parties which intend (more or less openly) to
       annihilate democracy (the Hitler scenario). One could object to this extension that
       there was nothing in Hungary’s Fidesz, or even in Poland’s PiS or in the program of
                                                             
       *                                                     
         András Sajó                                         
         sajoand@ceu.edu                                     
       1 Democracy Institute, Central European University, Budapest 1051, Hungary
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       898                                         A. Sajó   
                                                             
       Venezuela’s Chavez before their democratic takeover that would have triggered the
       defensive mechanisms of militant democracy, such as a party ban.
         Legal revolutions ‘affect the democratic identity of the constitution’ (p. 34).
       Legal revolution is the act of constituent power (the ‘people’). This provides imma-
       nent legitimacy: ‘the subject of the law is also its author’ (p. 43). The law is legiti-
       mate, not because it codifies a transcendent normative fact, but because its subject,
       ’the people,’ has in principle authored the law. However, as Schupmann points out,
       there is no ‘people,’ only an electorate which cannot properly represent the ‘people.’
       Hence, the need for constitutional arrangements as corrections to the electorate: mil-
       itant democracy will be a form of that protection against extreme digressions.
         Chapter 2 discusses the meaning of militant democracy which is presented as
       broader than its prevailing concentration on the party ban. The party ban paradigm
       creates a detection problem, as it will apply only when it is too late. Further, as
       Schupmann points out, ‘Existing theories of militant democracy are generally una-
       ble to recognize the dangers of populism and “illiberal democracy”’ (p. 55).
         Schupmann favors early intervention, which seems reasonable but runs into rule
       of law obstacles. Additionally, the track record of early intervention remains prob-
       lematic. For example, the Turkish Constitutional Court banned Refah and yet the
       successor party to Refah won the elections and Erdoğan is ruling until this day.
       However, what matters for the book is not a legal detail but the justification of mili-
       tant democracy, and it is here that its value becomes obvious. Without proper justifi-
       cation, militant democracy will not be available to safeguard democracy.
         In chapter 3, Schupmann relies on Rawls’ political constructivism. Behind the
       veil of ignorance, it will be an inevitable conclusion that ‘constitutional essentials,
       especially basic liberal rights, are implicitly unamendable; and … restricting the
       [political] rights of antidemocrats is justifiable.’ Basic liberal rights have norma-
       tive priority and have to be protected even at the expense of political rights. Many
       human rights supporters would object to this in the name of the 1993 United Nations
       Vienna Declaration and Program of Action that stands for the unity and equivalence
       of human rights: no lexical priority, only ‘balancing.’
         Schupmann develops the Rawlsian intuition further, recognizing that Rawls was
       not ready to draw the practical conclusions of his position (pp. 99-100). Certain
       technical questions emerge here, like what qualifies as a liberal right? Is freedom of
       speech a liberal right, or a political one? While it seems to pertain to the fundamen-
       tal essentials of liberty, it is a crucial part of political rights: associations do speak,
       and this is what they use on their way to victory.    
         A more serious difficulty, expressly confronted by Schupmann, is this: what is the
       legitimate behavior of a democratic political community where ‘a sufficient number
       of members hold “unreasonable” beliefs, beliefs that reject a democratic overlap-
       ping consensus’ (p. 83)? Is non-violent fanaticism to be prohibited? The answer is,
       ‘even if unreasonable members are a supermajority and can use democratic legal
       procedures to fundamentally alter the democratic essence of the constitution, Rawls’
       approach identifies authoritative and binding constitutional norms that justify reject-
       ing their political will’ (p. 85). Applying this position to populist movements it fol-
       lows that as soon as a party claims in a credible way that it is the only authentic
       representative of the people, it can be restricted preventatively.

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Democracy despite itself: liberal constitutionalism and… 899
                                                             
         Liberal rights constitute the identity of the constitution which corroborates their
       priority. Identity is by definition self-protecting as change like the legal revolution
       would end it. Republican democrats and non-democrats could criticize this position
       as a matter of status quo bias that does not allow change in the name of an immuta-
       ble identity. As long as one stands for liberalism, this is not a valid criticism, as the
       constitutional structure is indeed about the preservation of what is optimal for all
       (see Rawls), even if the electorate is not aware of it.
         With constitutional identity, enters Schmitt (ch. 4), who ‘theorized that every
       state was constituted by its “political” identity, and a state could legitimately use
       militant measures to defend that identity against legal and extralegal threats’ (p.
       105). For Schmitt this identity is an existential matter, and it entails readiness to die
       for it. Schupmann tries to expurgate these most sinister elements of constitutional
       identity. What the book uses from Schmitt is his opportunistic conservativism: his
       readiness to protect the state irrespective of the values the state stands for. With-
       out preventative protection, the pluralistic society destabilizes the state. Because
       potentially fratricidal pluralism results in ‘politicization,’ ‘institutions should not be
       designed to permit the electorate to act as if it were “the people”’ (p. 124). Given
       that only the electorate stands for the legal revolution, and the ‘electorate is inher-
       ently limited in its ability to amend the constitution’ (p. 125), therefore, the justifica-
       tion of non-amendability and the resulting militant defense of the constitution do not
       run into a theoretically valid objection.             
         Part III returns to the problem that was discussed in a more theoretical manner in
       Part II, namely it deals with ‘Fixing Basic Liberal Rights “Once and for All”.’ Here,
       non-amendability, political rights restriction, and judicial review are considered in
       three separate but interrelated chapters, drawing practical conclusions from the nor-
       mative justification.                                 
         In line with the position of the German Basic Law, Schupmann stands for the
       absolute and express entrenchment of democratic essentials. It is interesting that the
       Basic Law in a sense anticipated Rawls by entrenching fundamental liberal rights.
       The necessity of this is justified in the Schmittian sense: ‘…if the continued depolit-
       icization of society hinges on the state’s guarantee of those constitutional norms—as
       a liberal normative theory of militant democracy argues—then those norms ought to
       be entrenched absolutely’ (p. 141).                   
         A major contribution of the book’s defense of militant democracy is its refuta-
       tion of the juristocratic criticism and republican-democratic arguments which find
       militant democracy, and non-procedural constitutional limits to popular will-forma-
       tion, incompatible with people’s choices. Democracy needs specific protectors, and
       courts are the least biased in this respect, even if to some extent they are politi-
       cized. Schupmann points out that Jeremy Waldron’s influential and representative
       refutation of judicial constitution-protection depends on assumptions that cannot
       be sustained. Waldron simply disregarded democratic potentials which turned into
       burning reality (pp. 189-190). He assumed a worldwide consensus on fundamental
       rights and claimed that people work in good faith to solve their reasonable disagree-
       ments. Populism knows only the ‘truth’ of its own people; there is no place for disa-
       greement and even less for good faith common, reasonable solutions. A theory of
       militant democracy cannot accept cavalier assumptions. After all, constitutions are

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       900                                         A. Sajó   
                                                             
       contingency plans for the worst case scenario, even if, as the uncertainties and risks
       of militant democracy indicate, these plans are not complete, and remain unfinished.
                                                             
                                                             
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       de Lautréamont comte, Le. (1994) Maldoror & the complete works. Trans. Alexis Lykiard. East Change.
       Oppenheimer, D. and Edwards, M. (2012) Democracy despite itself: Why a system that shouldn’t work at
         all works so well. MIT Press.                       
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             