[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:818–821       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00764-x            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       The late Marx’s revolutionary roads: colonialism, gender,
       and indigenous communism                              
                                                             
       Kevin B. Anderson Verso, New York and London, 2025, x+288pp., ISBN:
       9781804296875                                         
                                                             
       Wayne Wapeemukwa1                                     
                                                             
       Published online: 6 June 2025                         
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Kevin B. Anderson describes The Late Marx’s Revolutionary Roads as a sequel to
       his earlier book (p. 7) Marx at the Margins, except that where the latter discusses
       Marx’s writings on non-western societies before 1867, the former explores Marx’s
       post-1868 research program, a period that many scholars, such as Gareth Stedman-
       Jones (2016), wrongly dismiss. Against such dismissals, Anderson persuasively
       demonstrates that Marx’s final years were his most effervescent, and that Marx not
       only revised his understandings of communism and revolution, but also his ideas
       about race and gender. To reconstruct this signal change, Anderson exhumes Marx’s
       terminal notebooks––some of which have been published only in 2024!––such as
       Marx’s notes on Roman slave uprisings and South Asian property forms. Marx
       examines these antipodes in the same notebook, ‘suggesting a connection’ between
       these ‘two agrarian societies,’ as well as an analysis of capitalism’s global expansion
       and aleatory origin (p. 9).                           
         Anderson’s book has six chapters with a lengthy introduction and is organized
       thematically. It excludes Marx’s voluminous notes on world history, mathematics,
       and ecology––the latter of which has been analyzed already by Kohei Saito (2023).
       Anderson’s basic takeaway is that the late/post-Capital Marx reconstructed his
       theory of revolution, thanks to new insights gleaned from researching non-western
       societies, and that this late turn clarifies previously published writings from this
       misunderstood period, such as the 1882 Preface to the Manifesto, Zasulich corre-
       spondence, as well as Marx’s critiques of the Gotha Program and Paris Commune.
         Throughout, Anderson consistently invokes the concept of the ‘dialectic,’ espe-
       cially when contrasting Marx’s approach to non-Western societies with Lewis H.
       Morgan, John Budd Phear, Maksim Kovalevsky, and even Friedrich Engels, all of
       whom epitomize a unilinear and teleological commitment to European civilization.
       *                                                     
         Wayne Wapeemukwa                                    
         wayne.wapeemukwa@ubc.ca                             
       1 University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1, Canada
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The late Marx’s revolutionary roads: colonialism, gender,… 819
                                                             
       In contrast to these vulgar empiricists, Anderson explains that Marx’s ethnographic
       turn was moored to Hegel, whose dialectical method Marx imbibed. For example,
       unlike Morgan and Kovalevsky, who blame the advent of systematic agriculture for
       social inequality, Marx observes ‘incipient’ class relations in archaic and ancient
       social forms. Such forms are preserved through their destruction, ‘a social fact that
       contributes to the possibility of revolt’ (p. 186), as the Sepoy Uprising exempli-
       fied. Marx concludes that colonialism not only prepares capitalism, but also loads
       the chamber for anti-colonial revolt––this dual character is why Anderson refers to
       Marx’s ethnography as ‘dialectical’ (p. 28).          
         With Marx’s late notebooks, Anderson casts new light on old sources, such as the
       1870 ‘Confidential Communication,’ which evidences ‘a complex dialectic of revo-
       lution [that] is truly international’ (p. 242). In the subsequent discussion, Anderson
       explains why Marx reversed his position on the Irish national question, identifying
       Ireland as the ‘lever’ of international communist revolution. By comparing Marx’s
       notes on non-western societies in light of this critical reversal vis-à-vis the national
       question, Anderson advances beyond previous assessments of Marx on nationalism,
       such as Erica Benner’s Really Existing Nationalisms (2018), a canonical text that
       overlooks Marx’s late notebooks and, thus, erases Marx’s dialectical reversal and,
       crucially, why this matters for colonized peoples even today. The late-Marx provin-
       cializes the communist revolution, no longer locating its epicenter in western Europe
       or England, but on the peripheries, margins, and interstices of Ireland and Russia:
       rumps that are underdeveloped industrially yet overexploited collaterally.
         Still, this dialectical recalibration precipitates a vital question that Anderson does
       not address. Anderson persuasively demonstrates how the late-Marx reversed his
       1848 thesis, predicting that the communist revolution would begin outside the west
       but then converge at the industrial core. Although Marx provincializes the commu-
       nist revolution, what does it mean that he still identifies the industrial west as its
       gravitational center? Would Marx have reached different conclusions if he had read
       Indigenous or non-western self-interpreters rather than scientific outsiders?
         In his second chapter, ‘Temporalities of Gender, Kinship, and Women’s Empow-
       erment,’ Anderson rehabilitates Marx’s views on gender, as informed by his late
       notebooks, and then usefully separates those views from Engels, who claimed
       (wrongly––as it turns out) to have felicitously shared those views in his Origin of the
       Family, Private Property and the State. Indeed, this opening chapter stakes one of
       Anderson’s most important claims, a claim not only about Engels’s editorializations,
       but the dominant ‘state-socialist’ reading of Marx criticized by ‘independent Marx-
       ists,’ such as Lukács, Sartre, and most importantly for this conversation, Beauvoir.
       Anderson confirms the suspicions of Engels’s critics, such as Raya Dunayevskaya
       and Michael Heinrich, who identify a scientistic wrong turn ‘beginning with Engels
       himself’ (p. 7). Nevertheless, Anderson does not dismiss Engels wholesale; instead,
       he meticulously reconstructs Engels’s thesis about the ‘world historic defeat of the
       female sex,’ contrasts it against Marx’s notes on matrilineal First Nations, and then
       shows how scientific ethnography informed the latter’s nascent intersectionality.
         Marx underscores how capital not only exports private property but also patri-
       archy. For example, in 1879, Marx observes how France took a much more hostile
       approach to settler colonialism in Algeria in the wake of the Paris Commune and,

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       820                                    W. Wapeemukwa  
                                                             
       most importantly, how attacking Indigenous-Algerian clans empowered a new patri-
       archal elite of landowners.                           
         In the lengthy penultimate chapter––‘Rome, India, and Russia: Three Agrarian
       Societies in Flux’––Anderson explores Marx’s departure from the ‘teleological
       framework’ of the 1848 Manifesto and his arrival at an intersectional analysis of
       race and class informed by comparing plebeian revolts in ancient Rome and the US
       Civil War. According to Anderson, ‘Marx appears to view the slave-plebian rela-
       tionship from a different angle, one that targets something akin to racism’ (p. 208).
       Fascinatingly, Marx explains the lack of revolution in ancient Rome in terms of a
       social cause––a point he reiterates concerning British working-class antagonism
       toward their Irish comrades as well as antipathy between ‘poor whites’ and enslaved
       persons in the US.                                    
         Unlike Engels and subsequent ‘orthodox Marxists,’ ‘Marx recognizes gender and
       family relations as structures operating with a degree of independence and auton-
       omy from the economic “base”’ (p. 81). This is not a new question for Marx. What is
       new is how he reapproaches it. Unlike his 1859 ‘Preface,’ where he provides a deter-
       mining primacy to the economic base, the late-Marx recognizes modes of social dif-
       ference, especially race and gender. Marx’s question is not whether the economic
       base determines the social superstructure but how; after 1868, Marx re-addresses
       this question from a perspective that is both international and intersectional.
         Chapter three, ‘Multilinear Concepts of Historical and Social Development,’ rein-
       forces Anderson’s thesis in Marx at the Margins, proving that Marx’s multilinearity
       deepens with his age and study of ethnography. In his book’s most exciting sequence
       of pages, Anderson responds directly to those who attribute to Marx a deterministic
       and unilinear understanding of history, typified by David Graeber and David Wen-
       grow’s The Dawn of Everything (2021). Anderson charges Graeber and Wengrow
       with ‘hyper-subjectivism,’ claiming, ‘they view the issue of power, of the political,
       as paramount, almost foundational’ (p. 118). While I agree with the thrust of Ander-
       son’s rebuttal, I do not believe he fully appreciates Graeber and Wengrow’s critique,
       thus leaving Marx open to their attack and further misunderstanding.
         Actually, Graeber and Wengrow arrive at a position remarkably similar to the
       late-Marx. In ‘The Problem with “Modes of Production”,’ Graeber and Wengrow
       write, pace Anderson: ‘The fact that these arrangements became subjects of political
       contestations does not mean they were political in origin ... Hierarchy and equality
       tend to emerge together’ (p. 208). They propose that private property is holding us
       back; furthermore, that private property can be reduced neither to a historical stage
       or mode of production, nor to an origin story, since history is multilinear, not stadial.
       For this reason, Graeber and Wengrow attack thinkers, like Marx, who depend on
       origin stories and transcendental mechanisms to explain what went wrong and what
       to do about it.                                       
         Graeber and Wengrow’s problem is not that they view power as foundational
       (they do not); it is that they contradict themselves in ways the late-Marx takes pains
       to avoid. Throughout The Dawn of Everything, Graeber and Wengrow dismiss ‘ori-
       gin stories’ for being ahistorical; yet they themselves posit an ahistorical and tran-
       scendental engine for social development––namely: schismogenesis. Graeber and
       Wengrow rely on a transcendental mechanism even though they claim to do the

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The late Marx’s revolutionary roads: colonialism, gender,… 821
                                                             
       opposite. Unlike Greaber and Wengrow, Marx disabuses himself of all teleological
       schemata after publishing Capital.                    
         Despite this qualm, Anderson’s book is a lucid and necessary resource for schol-
       ars, teachers, and organizers inspired by Marx. It helpfully clears the deadwood,
       describing and settling exasperating and inflammatory debates about Marx’s views
       on non-western society, world history, and private property. Most importantly,
       though, Anderson demonstrates that Marx was a tenacious reviser who never gave
       up on rethinking his views and thus imaginatively remapped different roads to com-
       munism, even as his days were numbered. The revolution is provincial yet eternal.
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Benner, E. (2018) Really existing nationalisms: A post-communist view from marx and engels. Verso.
       Graeber, D. and Wengrow, D. (2021) The dawn of everything: A new history of humanity. Signal.
       Saito, K. (2023) Marx in the anthropocene: Towards the idea of degrowth communism. Cambridge Uni-
         versity Press.                                      
       Stedman Jones, G. (2016) Karl Marx: Greatness and Illusion. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             