[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:842–845       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00774-9            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Legalizing the revolution: India and the constitution 
       of the postcolony                                     
                                                             
       Sandipto Dasgupta Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2024. 490
       pp., ISBN 1009525247                                  
                                                             
       Inder S. Marwah1                                      
                                                             
       Published online: 15 July 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       The postcolonial revolution, we have long been told, failed. But what exactly was
       the revolution, and how did it fail? In Legalizing the Revolution, Sandipto Dasgupta
       offers a penetrating and deeply researched response, richly detailed, lucidly writ-
       ten, and persuasively argued. Working in the intervals between legal and political
       theory, the book offers an unflinching analysis of Indian anticolonialism’s lapse into
       postcolonial stasis. It’s a story of lost promise. In the wake of the First World War,
       the Gandhian Congress’ mass actions propelled the Indian independence movement
       forward, ultimately leading to colonialism’s demise. The Constituent Assembly was
       formed to steer the transition to self-rule by designing a constitutional framework
       translating popular sovereignty into political power. 
         That was the aspiration. The reality, Dasgupta forcefully argues, is that the consti-
       tutional project didn’t channel the demos’ will as much as contain it within the safe
       confines of the administrative state, shepherding India toward autonomy without all
       the brouhaha of mass mobilization. The ascendence to postcolonial independence
       traded anticolonialism’s bottom-up democratic energies for top-down bureaucratic
       planning. The subcontinent’s social transformation, the constitution-makers deter-
       mined, would bypass the threat of civil unrest through expert steering, opting for
       ‘change without conflict, progress without violence, history without its battles. It
       was to be a revolution without a revolution’ (p. 20). 
         Dasgupta prosecutes the case with admirable thoroughness in three parts detail-
       ing how the assemblymen throttled the anticolonial movement’s democratic ground-
       ing for fear of its excesses. For the professionals at the tiller, constitution-making
       was an anxious business haunted by the ever-present specter of popular violence.
       Little surprise, then, that they adopted the colonial legal architecture intended to
       quell just this violence, integrating much of the British 1935 Government of India
       *                                                     
         Inder S. Marwah                                     
         marwahi@mcmaster.ca                                 
       1 McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada   
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Legalizing the revolution: India and the constitution of the… 843
                                                             
       Act into the future state. The movement from colonial to postcolonial governance
       was thus marked by continuity rather than rupture. The constitution was crafted
       by elites, for the masses—but largely away from the masses, and replete with elite
       apprehensions. It spoke for the people without ever speaking to them, let alone let-
       ting them speak for themselves (recent studies by Rohit De and Ornit Shani (2024)
       suggest otherwise).                                   
         Dasgupta tracks the implications of this constitutional straitjacketing across
       Indian social, political, and economic life. Chapter 1 follows the independence
       movement’s evolution, from its early liberalism, through Gandhian mass mobiliza-
       tions, to Congress’ eventual slide into bureaucratic self-isolation. Along the way,
       socialists and communists were sidelined, defanged, or conscripted into the Con-
       gress’ government in waiting. Chapter 2 examines India’s coalescence as a cohe-
       sive national economic space, and how state-directed economic planning came to
       supersede the social question of economic and property-based justice. Development
       trumped redistribution, and the common enemy of colonial power enabled govern-
       ing cadres to paper over Indian society’s deep inequalities.
         Chapter 3 addresses the political consolidation of a ‘people’ and its distance from
       the Constituent Assembly meant to represent its interests. This was a constitutive
       absence—a people originated and excluded—as the orderly business of state-mak-
       ing fell to indirectly rather than popularly elected representatives. Chapter 4 traces
       the administrative apparatus’ persistence, as the ‘vast shadows of the Government of
       India Act’ (p. 157), a prevailing civil service, and the sway of professionalized elites
       stretched from pre- to post-independence governance. A less obvious but no less
       consequential inheritance was the constitution’s functionalism, as purpose-driven
       toward securing social stability rather than popular power. Chapter 5 delves into the
       assembly’s tinkering to devise a system of government forceful enough to drive the
       developmental project forward without tipping into autocracy. The result was a par-
       liament more amenable to administrators than constituents (pp. 201–202).
         Chapter 6 offers, to my mind, the sharpest indictment of the assembly’s timor-
       ousness. Echoing the colonial concerns it was meant to transcend, the constitution’s
       schedule of rights came with its own limitations, enabling the criminalization of
       the very extra-legal forms of civil resistance that led to independence. The constitu-
       tion’s world-leading word count—over 146,000—attests to its authors’ trepidations
       regarding not only their concitoyens’ unruliness but also prospective judicial review.
       Better to head that off at the constitutional level than leave it to the vagaries of future
       judges and citizens. Chapter 7 shows how property regimes annexed to the colo-
       nial state were unperturbed by the shift to independence. This sets the stage for the
       book’s concluding argument that the postcolonial state’s failure to enact land reform
       remains at the root of India’s deep stratifications. Finally, Chapter 8, on judiciaries
       and lawyers, is both somewhat extraneous and legalistic, sketching the court’s con-
       servative influence in the march toward self-government.
         There are different ways of understanding what makes a revolution, even an
       unrevolutionary revolution of the kind Legalizing chronicles. The obvious candi-
       date here is the Gramscian view of passive revolution fruitfully deployed by such
       scholars as, among others, Partha Chatterjee (1986) and Sudipta Kaviraj (1988) in
       the Indian context. For Subaltern Studies, passive revolution offered a framework

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       844                                      I. S. Marwah 
                                                             
       to comprehend decolonization’s failure to alter India’s class structure. But despite
       the seeming affinities, this doesn’t seem to be what Dasgupta has in mind since it’s
       only mentioned in the book’s closing pages, and there in passing. It’s not clear why,
       since Kaviraj, for instance, treats Nehru’s capitulation to bureaucracy and Con-
       gress’ demobilization of the masses—the precise dynamics Legalizing addresses—
       as instantiating passive revolution (1988, p. 2433). The Gramscian account also
       explains why the Indian peasantry might not agitate for the agrarian reform whose
       failure the book posits as among decolonization’s principal shortfalls (more on that
       below). Dasgupta’s notion of revolution appears by comparison somewhat murkier,
       or conceptually underspecified.                       
         Two other thoughts. First, Dasgupta depicts the constitution-makers as choosing
       between two clear options: either channel the democratic energies of the masses into
       the constitutional project or submit it to the strong direction of the administrative
       state (p. 143). This may, however, overstate their cohesiveness and purposiveness.
       The assembly was a fragmented body, with different actors of differing ideologi-
       cal persuasions making different choices about different issues at different times,
       in the trying circumstances of Partition’s spectacular violence and in the wake of
       catastrophic global war. Their determinations may have been less coherent, and their
       implications less obvious, than Dasgupta suggests. This isn’t to defend their bureau-
       cratic conservatism, or the elitism of process and actors, or the distance between
       them and the populace. It is, rather, to note that the clarity of the options—mobilize
       the masses or hand the keys to the experts—may to some extent be a product of
       retrospection.                                        
         Second, there’s a certain tension in the book’s concluding pages on the choice
       that got passed up. Most of Legalizing shows how anticolonial radicalism was stifled
       as it became routed into the corridors of bureaucracy. The diagnosis here is that
       the constitution’s shortcomings lay in its drift from the masses. The solution: more
       democracy, more mobilization, more popular will. But in the book’s conclusion,
       there’s another culprit (the real one, one senses) which is the constitution’s failure to
       tackle ‘the dictatorship of property’ (p. 200). Without dismantling Indian systems of
       land tenure—the power of landlords passed from zamindars to large-scale farmers—
       it left intact the material basis for iniquitous social relations. In this case, what was
       required was not more democracy, but more forceful legislation to raze the grounds
       of economic inequality, as Gunnar Myrdal observed in the 1960s (p. 303). But,
       Dasgupta recognizes (p. 304), these alternatives are in tension: inequality might be
       stemmed by more democracy or by more top-led economic planning, but it doesn’t
       seem like it can be both. The problem, then, isn’t that the postcolonial project wasn’t
       democratic enough. It’s that it wasn’t materialist enough.
         The answer, in good Marxist form, lies in the mobilization of the masses (pp.
       308–310). But to mobilize is not necessarily terribly democratic. It is to loosen
       hegemony’s grip and move the multitude toward its supposed interests—to lead a
       horse to water through education, galvanization, and organization. From this stand-
       point, the sticking point isn’t that the people’s energies were repressed through
       administration. It’s that they weren’t directed toward the right end. They were incor-
       rectly, or insufficiently, mobilized. The greatest mover of masses was, of course,
       Gandhi, and there was nothing remotely democratic in his mobilizations. From tip to

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Legalizing the revolution: India and the constitution of the… 845
                                                             
       tail, they were entirely of his design, based on his estimation of what swaraj required
       at a given moment, and subject to his confounding idiosyncrasies. He had his rea-
       sons—some good, some bad—for doing so but he ran the independence movement
       with military exactitude, down to the detailed comportments of jailed satyagrahis,
       how adherents should behave at train stations, the precise purposes of fasting, and
       much more. Mobilization isn’t necessarily democratic, and democracy doesn’t nec-
       essarily yield economic justice.                      
         For seventy-five years, studies of Indian democracy, often in a liberal key, have
       carried a whiff of celebratory triumphalism—the world’s largest democracy, the
       crowning achievement of nonviolent civil disobedience, a site of unparalleled reli-
       gious pluralism and toleration, its constitutional innovativeness. This is not false, but
       incomplete. Legalizing the Revolution reminds us that constitutions, like all political
       artifacts, carry the traces of their origins—not just those who wrote them, but also
       those written out of them.                            
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Chatterjee, P. (1986) Nationalist thought and the colonial world: A derivative discourse. Minnesota Uni-
         versity Press.                                      
       De, R. and Shani, O. (2024) Assembling India’s constitution: towards a new history. Past & Present
         263(1): 205–248.                                    
       Kaviraj, S. (1988) A critique of the passive revolution. Economic & Political Weekly 23(45/47):
         2429–2444.                                          
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             