[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:814–817       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00754-z            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Reconsidering cosmopolitanism and forgiveness: Arendt,
       Derrida, and “care for the world”                     
                                                             
       Christopher Peys Rowman & Littlefield, 2020, xxxii + 165 pp., ISBN
       978-1-78661-518-3                                     
                                                             
       Maurits de Jongh1                                     
                                                             
       Published online: 26 March 2025                       
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       In today’s political climate, rife as it remains with overt xenophobia and dehuman-
       izing rhetoric, Christopher Peys’s book offers a welcome refuge to rethink the bless-
       ings, rather than curses, of sharing the world with strangers. Peys aims to articulate
       a ‘world-centric theory of public care’ (p. xii) in which practices of political forgive-
       ness and cosmopolitan hospitality are unpacked as valuable instantiations of such
       care. Peys works his way through major texts of Hannah Arendt and Jacques Derrida
       to construct this theory. He credits Derrida for illuminating the aporetic qualities
       of forgiveness and cosmopolitanism, while Arendt equips Peys with the conceptual
       apparatus to positively articulate the meaning and value of these practices.
         The book is structured around both this diagnostic and constructive task: the
       first chapter unpacks Derrida’s take on both forgiveness and cosmopolitanism. The
       second and third examine how each concept, respectively, may be more fruitfully
       understood in terms of Arendt’s notion of care for the world. Finally, the fourth
       chapter examines the temporal dimensions of such practices of public care.
         The aporetic or ‘undecidable’ character of forgiveness lies in the practice being
       torn by an ethical imperative to ‘unconditional’ forgiveness, on one hand, and cal-
       culated leanings to subject forgiveness to conditionality, on the other (e.g., that a
       perpetrator must confess guilt, or should declare a longing for forgiveness). Practic-
       ing such conditional forgiveness compromises the moral value of the ideal in several
       ways: it often involves third parties, like judges, to mediate the practice of forgive-
       ness; it turns a disinterested gift into an act of exchange; or it is teleologically ori-
       ented toward reconciliation—thereby instrumentalizing the gift of forgiving.
         In this regard, Peys helped me make sense of my mother’s adage, that the giving
       of a real gift needs to hurt. There is much to learn from Derrida’s invitation to imag-
       ine what forgiving ‘the unforgivable’ would look like. After all, it is only too easy
       *                                                     
         Maurits de Jongh                                    
         m.j.dejongh@uu.nl                                   
       1 Utrecht University, Utrecht 3512 BL, The Netherlands
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reconsidering cosmopolitanism and forgiveness: Arendt,… 815
                                                             
       (and too human) to restrict forgiveness to the forgivable, or to limit its power and
       field of application to the proportionality of wrongs it confronts. Peys recalls Der-
       rida’s insistence that any pure notion of forgiveness cannot be practiced in tandem
       with punishment: “it is only against the unforgivable, and thus on the scale without
       scale, of a certain inhumanity of the inexpiable, against the monstrosity of radical
       evil that forgiveness, if there is such a thing, measures itself” (Derrida cited on p.
       13).                                                  
         While Derrida also admits the need to mediate between unconditional and con-
       ditional forgiveness, that is, to ‘negotiate’ between ideal and practice, Peys helps
       the reader to draw insightful contrasts with Arendt (pp. 13–15). For Arendt argued
       instead (and no less aporetically) that the unforgivable is also unpunishable. Moreo-
       ver, she limited the scope of forgiveness to mere trespasses, excluding crimes that
       form unspeakable horrors from its miraculous powers (p. 45). In a dense reading
       of Arendt, Peys reconstructs forgiveness as an empowering practice of care that is
       distinct from both vengeance and punishment. For Arendt, just punishment is an
       alternative to forgiveness, but it can only deal with ordinary crime. Vengeance is an
       opposite rather than alternative to forgiveness.      
         Peys argues that acts of vengeance display a sovereign, dominating disposition
       that characterizes the figure Arendt calls homo faber—ultimately entrapping all par-
       ties in spirals of violence. This reading prompts the question of how to tell the dif-
       ference between acts of vengeance, just punishment, or otherwise violent reckonings
       with wrongs and outbursts of evil (see, e.g., Peys’s discussion of Eichmann’s death
       sentence on pp. 44, 53). While Peys follows Arendt and contemporary authors like
       Ella Myers (2013) in orienting ethics, law, and politics toward the world rather than
       the self or the other, I suspect that diagnosing vengeance itself seems impossible
       without ongoing excursions into moral psychology (rather than political theory).
         The same ‘undecidability’ that marks forgiveness can also be discerned in Der-
       rida’s account of hospitality. Peys takes it to involve, on one hand, ‘an absolute,
       unconditional welcoming of the Other as a stranger, without stipulations or an
       expectation of reciprocity’ (p. 20). Yet it must also reckon, on the other, with the
       vicissitudes of real politics and is therefore ‘indissociable’ from conditionality and
       compromise (p. 21).                                   
         For instance, if hospitability is truly absolved from reciprocal expectations, it
       means that a host cannot even ask a guest for their name in return for their hospi-
       tality—indeed, it seems that the whole distinction between host and guest should
       be abandoned. But as an unavoidably conditional practice, the ‘seemingly harmless
       request’ to ask for the Other’s name is liable to establish a hierarchical relation (p.
       92), e.g., when identification is used as a technique of policing. Beyond crediting
       Derrida for pointing to this aporia, Peys is also sympathetic to Derrida’s call for ‘cit-
       ies of refuge’ (p. 23 and ch. 3) as ‘structures of welcoming’ that move beyond the
       statist account of Kantian cosmopolitanism.           
         This local emphasis is reminiscent of the increasing attention to municipalism
       and the city in political theory. But it remains unclear how much qualitative institu-
       tional difference can be expected from Derrida’s call. For instance, would cities not
       also be entrusted, just like states, with the exercise of public powers of coordination
       and compulsion which may well compromise their universal hospitality?

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       816                                      M. de Jongh  
                                                             
         Peys’s focus, however, lies not so much in this institutional analysis as in pro-
       viding a phenomenological account of what such cities or worlds of cosmopolitan
       hospitality and political forgiveness would look like. And it is precisely in this
       endeavor that he builds on Arendt to ‘re-world’ Derrida’s other-centric ethics. In
       particular, he deploys Arendt’s notion of amor mundi and ‘care for the world’ to
       articulate this theory. Peys argues that a caring forgiveness requires public sto-
       rytelling and that a caring cosmopolitanism calls for an embrace of the narrative
       voice of the other (p. 111).                          
         There is much to admire in his careful and nuanced reading of Arendt. Even
       so, at times Peys seems to press Arendt’s distinctions even harder than she (in)
       famously did herself. For instance, he writes that ‘vengeance is but a violent form
       of work’ (p. 49) and depicts it as an ultimately powerless practice that ‘operates
       in accordance with a means-ends and unfree logic’ (p. 50). Yet Arendt’s insight
       that violence and power are opposites is a conditional claim—they potentially
       bite one another but need not do so. Her point, rather, was that violence is never
       a substitute for power and that, since the latter rests on democratic legitimation, it
       cannot be collapsed into the former.                  
         Similarly, Arendt was less critical of homo faber’s means-ends category as
       such than about the reduction of public affairs to utilitarian evaluation or instru-
       mental rationality (Arendt, 1958, 1972, p. 157). And as scholars like Patchen
       Markell (2011) have shown, Arendt also theorizes the spatial and temporal con-
       nections between the labor–work–action ideal types, and stresses the bridges and
       interdependencies between public and private.         
         Peys’s effort to rehabilitate ‘care for the world’ could be further strengthened
       by cashing out these connections (rather than distinctions). For instance, he uses
       ‘the phrase “private care” in reference to the activity of labor and “public care” in
       reference to practices of caring for the world’ (p. 137 n. 21). This overlooks the
       fact that labor (and not just work or action) also has a distinctly public dimension.
       Indeed, Arendt tasks labor with ‘the preservation and protection of the world’ and
       even interprets administrative labor as a ‘worldkeeping’ activity that is indispen-
       sable alongside the ‘worldbuilding’ practices of work and action (1958, p. 100;
       see also Rodriguez, 2008).                            
         It seems to me that Peys’s laudable proposal to engage in a kind of ‘homemak-
       ing’ (p. 128) would resonate even stronger if it did not only foreground the stories
       of action as care for the communicative world. Care for the material world (in
       the modes of labor and work) is no less central to revive practices like cosmo-
       politan hospitability or, say, environmental repair—from cooking food, collect-
       ing clothes, and planting trees to providing administrative support and construct-
       ing the adequate housing that the Other, just like everyone else, needs to call the
       world and its natural surroundings their home too.    
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reconsidering cosmopolitanism and forgiveness: Arendt,… 817
       References                                            
                                                             
       Arendt, H. (1958) The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press.
       Arendt, H. (1972) Crises of the Republic. Harcourt Brace.
       Markell, P. (2011) Arendt’s work. On the architecture of The Human Condition. College Literature 38:
         15–44.                                              
       Myers, E. (2013) Worldly Ethics. Democratic Politics and Care for the World. Duke University Press.
       Rodriguez, M. (2008) The challenges of keeping a world: Hannah Arendt on administration. Polity 40:
         488–508.                                            
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             