[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:4             
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00782-9            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Free gifts: capitalism and the politics of nature     
                                                             
       Alyssa Battistoni, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2025, 328pp.,
       ISBN: 9780691263465                                   
                                                             
       Lukas Slothuus1                                       
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       In the pathbreaking and vital Free Gifts: Capitalism and the Politics of Nature,
       Alyssa Battistoni argues that capitalism fails to value nature and rather treats it like a
       ‘free gift’. Such free gifts are those things which are simultaneously incredibly use-
       ful yet not granted any economic value: wind powering sailing ships and turbines,
       fertile land and sunshine for agriculture, or housework and childcare. These gifts are
       never actually free but always paid for elsewhere – whether by the exploitation of
       workers, atmospheric pollution, the gendered character of reproductive labour, or
       the regenerative power of the biosphere. Battistoni shows how capitalism’s failure to
       value nature is not an accident or an unfortunate oversight but built into its structure
       and dynamics.                                         
         Both mainstream and critical explanations of capitalism’s inability to value nature
       fall short. Market failure to internalise negative externalities or the incomplete com-
       modification of nature that means it is not valued correctly do not grapple with the
       character of capital, because externalities are simply expressions of the relationship
       between social cost and market power. Carbon credits or pricing nature cannot solve
       the problem to course-correct capitalism’s ecologically destructive path. Likewise,
       critical scholars’ focus on ideology or violence are helpful but insufficient. Ideo-
       logical approaches point to the systematic undervaluation and disregard for nature
       through the idea of cheap nature as an actively constructed category. Violence or
       expropriation-centred explanations emphasise the centrality of primitive accumu-
       lation as the process throwing people off their land and consolidating power and
       ownership in the hands of a ruling class that took and exploited nature to extract
       maximum value and profits. While these are not necessarily wrong, they fail to get to
       the real root of the problem. Moreover, the moralisation of nature – imbuing it with
       agency, significance, or inherent worth – is insufficient to protect it, precisely because
                                                             
         Lukas Slothuus                                      
         l.slothuus@sussex.ac.uk                             
       1 University of Sussex, Falmer, BN1 9RH, UK           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        4  Page 2 of 4                           L. Slothuus 
                                                             
       its neglect is not rooted in a wrongheaded idea about nature but a more fundamental
       material problem.                                     
         Battistoni turns to the role of value itself, how it is created, and why some things
       have value and others do not in capitalism. She surveys four key domains: the work-
       place, the home, the environment, and ecosystems to show how capitalism relies on
       the free gifts of nature to function. Domination and exploitation through wage labour,
       the offloading of reproductive labour, the imposition of social costs on the environ-
       ment, and the neglect of species of ecosystems through natural capital all express the
       structural force of ‘class rule’ and ‘market rule’ (p. 57–64). Class rule enables a small
       section of society to rule over the labour of others and over investments. Market rule
       subjects everyone to the force of market exchange where value is severed from the
       actual usefulness of things, and crucially where individuals have little to no agency
       to challenge this systemic fact.                      
         This book is so rich and expansive as to preclude a full engagement with its mani-
       fold ideas in this brief review. It deploys Marxist concepts in a highly useful manner
       to precisely dissect and understand the dynamics of capital. Subsumption as the inte-
       gration and subordination of human labour and nonhuman elements into the produc-
       tion process is a key concept for Battistoni. Whereas formal subsumption involves
       the assimilation of noncapitalist labour into capitalism, real subsumption is the trans-
       formation of the production process altogether, for instance by exploiting human
       sociability through the division of labour. However, hybrid or commercial subsump-
       tion, which receives deserved new attention in the book, persists in capitalism. Here,
       capital stands apart from the production process altogether and participates only in
       the realm of exchange. Platform work or agricultural piecework thus appear as ‘pre-
       capitalist’ forms (pace the neofeudalist thesis) yet are entirely compatible with capi-
       talism through the ongoing dialectic of subsumption.  
         A real strength of the book is that it not only reinterprets these familiar concepts
       in light of the value of nature but pushes beyond them to develop a new conceptual
       vocabulary. For example, Battistoni develops the concept of ‘suprasumption’ (pp.
       98–100), meaning the friction caused by the acceleration of capital’s ever-increasing
       attempt to really subsume. In many cases, some of which Battistoni explores, capital
       decides to simply engage in ‘abdication through disinterest’ rather than accumulation
       by dispossession (p. 192). Thus the destruction of nature is not just capital’s failure
       to control nature but a product of the real abstractions leading to the abandonment of
       nature as a concern altogether, keeping it outside the value-form. The real surprise
       is not that capital encloses the free gifts of nature into the property regime but rather
       that some gifts remain free even today (p. 3).        
         Battistoni demonstrates an impressive command of the history of political and
       economic thought, environmental political theory, Marxism, and existentialist phi-
       losophy. Yet existentialism falls out of the picture in the middle chapters on wage
       labour, reproductive labour, the environment, and natural capital, and so it appears
       that Marxism provides a sufficient analytical apparatus whereas existentialism per-
       haps motivates and offers ways of responding to the problem. There is no issue with
       such a division of labour, however probing the limits of existentialism for a Marxist
       political economy and theory of nature could be a worthwhile exercise in itself.

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Free gifts: capitalism and the politics of nature Page 3 of 4 4
                                                             
         (Un)freedom, both in and beyond concerns of nature, and nature, both in and
       beyond concerns of (un)freedom, sit in a complex if not uneasy relationship. Fol-
       lowing Charbonnier (2021), freedom and material abundance destroying the planet
       are clearly not just related but dialectically connected. Western ideas – particularly
       among enlightenment thinkers – and political practices of freedom alike depend on
       an exploitative relationship toward nature and the outside more generally. Yet is the
       free gift of reproductive labour really an issue of ‘nature’? Is wage labour? Or are
       reproductive and wage labour rather instantiations of and precondition for the human
       exploitation of natural capital and the environment, just like imperialism is? After all,
       labour is only one force of production and natural resources gain value through being
       worked upon. The free gift of reproductive and wage labour is borne by humans
       whereas the free gift of environment and ecosystems is borne primarily by nonhu-
       mans, but with climate change also by humans. Are these two pairs equivalent?
         Battistoni notes at the outset (p. 3) that fantasies of freedom are fossil-fuelled and
       while there is some consideration of coal, the absolutely foundational role of fossil
       fuels in capitalism falls somewhat by the wayside as the book develops. Capital’s
       stranglehold on the globe hinged on the profitable extraction and burning of fossil
       fuels, fundamentally altered both capitalism and the planet and enabling new regimes
       of worker exploitation and imperialism, which fall outside the scope of the book. Bat-
       tistoni’s analysis masterfully both abstracts to the level of value and then zooms in
       on particular instantiations, which leaves the reader equally wanting more detail on
       the specifics of the fossil-fuelled capitalist economy and productively invites other
       scholars to pick up on these concrete aspects and apply her framework in their own
       work.                                                 
         What are the avenues, then, for political action (and, conversely, the foundations
       of despair) in a world where the free gifts of nature are appropriated and exploited
       under the power of class and markets? Battistoni locates the foundations of hope
       in existentialism inflected with materialism. The key fear is that ‘an ecologically
       sustainable society will be less free, and that a free society will be ecologically cata-
       strophic’ (p. 223). Does degrowth communism offer a viable path and ideal or do we
       have to consign ourselves to making some kind of reticent existentialist peace with
       circumscribed freedom on a burning planet, whereby to ‘continually reevaluate ethe
       way we live in the world isn’t a tragedy but the very expression of freedom itself’
       (p. 229)? As Battistoni reminds us, a distinctive feature of the present is a shift to
       market abjection, where we are not just dependent on the unfree power of the market
       but also on the power of others to include us in the market (p. 197–198). This is a
       double unfreedom at the root of not just the destruction of nature but the alienation
       from human sociability and plays out in the widespread malaise and suffering that
       constitutes the human condition today, what Charbonnier calls ‘historic loneliness’
       (p. 261).                                             
         A central feature of the problem is the ‘cost disease’ (pp. 163ff). Manufactured
       goods become simultaneously ever-cheaper and more profitable while services
       become relatively more expensive and less profitable. Capitalism thereby fails to
       address the climate crisis since it privileges increased resource use over the provi-
       sion of the work that sustains and improves human and nonhuman life. While green
       capitalism or the so-called green transition may bring down the carbon intensity of

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        4  Page 4 of 4                           L. Slothuus 
                                                             
       the economy, they will not fundamentally alter our relationship to nature or secure
       human freedom. In a class society ruled by the market this is not just unlikely but
       impossible. The value of Free Gifts is in exposing this fundamental problem. You
       have to wait eight hours in the emergency room before you can be seen by a doctor,
       may not be able to afford to go to the dentist, have no space or time to interact with
       people in your community, and feel profoundly alienated from your work, which
       might either be back-breaking, bullshit, or predatory. But your fridge can now com-
       municate with your toothbrush via wifi.               
         We are therefore also dialectically bound together through common and shared
       experiences of this loneliness. Free Gifts succeeds at the rare accomplishment of not
       just asking the right questions and answering them convincingly, but of also spurring
       a whole series of further questions left for us all to reckon with as we stare deeper
       down the abyss. This spectacular book should be mandatory reading for students
       and scholars as a methodological exemplar of how to denaturalise and rematerialize
       political theory (p. 7) while substantively carrying forward the project of the critique
       of political economy in our cursed era of genocide and ecological catastrophe.
       Declarations                                          
       Competing interests There are no competing interests to declare.
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Charbonnier, P. (2021). Affluence and freedom: An environmental history of political ideas. Polity.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             