[PAGE 1]
et al. [full author details at the end of the article]       
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:31            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00796-x            
       CRITICAL EXCHANGE                                     
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and
       limits                                                
                                                             
                                                             
       Amanda Machin1 · Cecilie Sachs Olsen2 · Carl Death3 · Paula Diehl4 ·
       Sophia Hatzisavvidou5 · Oliver Marchart6 · Florian Malzacher7
                                                             
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       We are currently witnessing what we refer to in this Critical Exchange as ‘a turn to
       the imagination’. Across the academy and beyond, the concept of ‘imaginaries’is
       increasingly used to examine how the imagination is provoked, harnessed and dis-
       persed to encourage or inhibit social, political, economic, technological and cul-
       tural transformation. Highlighting the need for critical reflection not only on the
       possibilities but also the limits of this turn, we explore the role of the imagination
       and imaginaries in contemporary political theory, analysis and practice. The con-
       tributions discuss the mutation of dominant far-right imaginaries; the promise of
       anti-colonial, postgrowth, ecosocialist, and ecofeminist imaginaries; and the po-
       tential for new political means, such as theatre, to expand our imagination and
       create imaginaries that ‘stick’. The contributions do not offer a single framework
       for understanding and engaging with the turn to the imagination, but rather provide
       possible starting points for a diverse, critical and political account of this ‘turn’ and
       its implications.                                     
       Keywords Social imaginaries · Political imagination · Democracy · Ecology ·
       Decolonization                                        
                                                             
                                                             
       The apparent deficit of progressive alternatives in various policy arenas has led
       numerous scholars and activists to explore the possibilities offered by the imagi-
       nation. Drawing from the work of scholars such as Jacques Lacan, Cornelius Cas-
       toriadis, Claude Lefort, Ernesto Laclau, Franz Fanon, Benedict Anderson, Charles
       Taylor, Sheila Jasanoff, Achille Mbembe and Kathryn Yusoff, amongst others, the
       concept of ‘imaginaries’ is being utilised across the academy and beyond, to facilitate
       interrogation of the way that the imagination is provoked, harnessed and dispersed
       to encourage or inhibit social, political, economic, technological and cultural trans-
                                                             
                                                             
       Extended author information available on the last page of the article
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 2 of 28                        A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       formation. This literature studies the collective imagination in relation, for example,
       to socio-ecological transition (Braun, 2015; Death, 2022a, 2022b; Hatzisavvidou,
       2024; Machin, 2022; Milkoreit, 2017; Sachs Olsen, 2021; Tozer & Klenk, 2018),
       decolonization (Ciofalo et al., 2022; Daniel & Miller, 2024; Demos, 2023; Heeswijk
       et al., 2021; Whyte, 2017), populism (Marchart, 2023) and crisis (Haiven, 2014; Jes-
       sop, 2012). Attending to the imagination and imaginaries, then, is seen as crucial for
       highlighting the often-overlooked material, emotional, and aesthetic dimensions of
       social and political life.                            
         The key assumption in this work is that the imagination partially constitutes social
       reality, and that failure to grasp this stymies any attempt to understand and encourage
       substantive change (Browne & Diehl, 2019, 394). The imagination here resonates
       with ideas of prefiguration, taking as its task the ‘image making’ of a desired world-to-
       come, bringing the future ‘back’ into the present (Bottici, 2019; Frase, 2016; Haiven
       & Khasnabish, 2014) in order to move beyond ‘the end’ (Demos, 2023). The desire
       for novel alternatives has led to an emphasis on the importance of artistic ‘spaces’ to
       foment and embody the imagination (Malzacher, 2019; Sachs Olsen, 2019). Without
       inspiring and coherent visions of the future, we are told, policies that aim to incentiv-
       ise and initiate change will fail (Mulgan, 2022). The imagination ‘reveals to us more
       than what we already know’ (Heller, 2016, 289), it is a site of potent (re)generation,
       showcasing ‘the human power to convert absence into presence, actuality into pos-
       sibility, what-is into something-other-than-it-is’ (Kearney, 1998, 4).
         We can define the imagination as ‘a way of seeing, sensing, thinking, and dream-
       ing the formation of knowledge, which creates the conditions for material interven-
       tions in and political sensibilities of the world’ (Yusoff & Gabrys, 2011, 516, original
       italics). According to this approach, the imagination is not something internal, but
       is on the contrary an ‘interplay between material and perceptual worlds, where con-
       cepts cohere, forces pull and attract, and things, discourses, subjects, and objects are
       framed, contested, and brought into being’ (Yusoff & Gabrys, 2011, 517).
         While the imagination can be understood as a faculty that conducts beliefs, judge-
       ments and prejudices (Heller, 2016), an imaginary is ‘a collective structure that
       organizes the imagination’ (Browne & Diehl, 2019), through which we experience
       and (mis)recognise the world (Lennon, 2015, 1). Imaginaries crystallise to provide
       normative horizons for a society but are never solidly fixed or complete; their trans-
       formation over time underpins or stymies social change (Diehl, 2019; Machin, 2025)
       and helps to determine expectations about which political subjects can participate in
       transformation and how they do so (Machin, 2025). Imaginaries are also performa-
       tive: they enact and constitute the horizons they refer to, rather than simply describe
       or represent them (Kershaw, 1994). Notions of performativity further point to how
       the imagination and imaginaries are being constituted in, through, and by political
       performances, that can be active, presentational, reflective, embodied and creative
       (Butler, 1990; Rai et al., 2021).                     
         Scholarship on the imagination and imaginaries is thriving, and constitutes what
       we refer to in this Critical Exchange as ‘a turn to the imagination’. Although this
       ‘turn’ is relevant for various disciplines, our Critical Exchange explores the sig-
       nificance of this turn for political theory and analysis and the relationship between
       politics and the arts. It analyses the roles that the imagination is expected to play in

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 3 of 28 31
                                                             
       performing, provoking and configuring social and political change, the limitations
       to transformation and democratization posed by prevailing imaginaries, and the pos-
       sibility of grasping the ‘doings’ of the imagination in the world. All the contributions
       respond to the following guiding question: why and in what ways is the imagination
       relevant for contemporary political theory?           
         What is at stake in answering this question, is the possibility (prospect/opening?)
       of critical reflection on the possibilities but also the limits of (and imposed by) the
       human and collective imagination. If imaginaries are performative (Austin, 1962)
       and have ‘instituting power’ (Castoriadis, 1994), then they can also work to pow-
       erfully conserve existing practices and ideas and to protect the status quo. This is
       why the ‘turn to imagination’ should be robustly critiqued. Lack of critical reflection
       bears the risk of undermining the contribution that the imagination, and literature
       that examines it, can make to political life. We are fully aware that talking of ‘turns’
       can easily become an intellectual fad driven less by critical scrutiny than by jostling
       for name recognition and for identifying the latest flight of academic fancy (Barnett,
       1998; Hawkins, 2019). Within this kind of ‘turn-talk’, the imagination quickly joins
       the ranks of ‘buzzwords’ that are central to an intellectual and political zeitgeist but
       whose complexity and tensions remain significantly under-theorised.
         In the present moment, the turn to the imagination presupposes and celebrates the
       power of human beings to creatively transform the real into the ideal. This celebratory
       approach relates to what is perceived as the ‘miracle’ of imagination, as the ability to
       transform the time and space of our world into a specific human mode of existence,
       which has fascinated philosophers and thinkers throughout the centuries. Here, the
       imagination is romanticized for its emancipatory potential, with less attention given
       to its darker histories. The creative power of imagining has been inseparable from the
       power to transmute nature into culture, to transform ‘the wilderness’ into a habitat
       where human beings might dwell. This, however, has been a mixed blessing, tainted
       by extreme forms of colonial violence by humans defined as the white, Western man
       against racialized, sexualized and naturalized ‘others’ (Braidotti, 2021). Hence, the
       imagination does not only produce emancipatory content, it also creates images of
       the enemy and ‘the Other’. As observed by a biblical commentator: ‘Imagination is
       good and evil, for in the midst of it man (sic) can master the vortex of possibilities
       and realize the human figure proposed in creation, as he could not do prior to the
       knowledge of good and evil’ (Buber, 1952, 93-97). Herein, Buber concludes, lies the
       ‘[g]reatest danger and greatest opportunity at once’.s
         When talking of ‘a turn to the imagination’ we must also guard ourselves against the
       worrying normativity of imagining as an ‘unthreatening’ form of politics (Marchart,
       2024). Because the imagination comes with a very positive set of attachments it
       can easily be recuperated through the political economies of neoliberal institutions,
       including the academy, as a mere incantation without any clear connection to politi-
       cal struggles. As part of what Boltanski and Chiapello (2003) describe as ‘the new
       spirit of capitalism’, the imagination risks becoming a parody of itself, something
       wholly corruptible and able to be put to use to advance dominant political-economic
       interests and depoliticize debates around possible alternatives.
         Yet, as this Critical Exchange shows, if the imagination cannot proffer magical
       solutions to social ills, imaginaries nevertheless remain significant parts of political

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 4 of 28                        A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       realities that can be approached critically but also hopefully. What follows, then, is
       a discussion regarding the ‘turn to the imagination’ in political theory, its potential
       and limits in probing, producing and performing socioeconomic, ecological, cultural
       and political transformation. Paula Diehl starts by (re)turning to the account of ‘the
       political imaginary’ set out by Castoriadis that, she claims, provides important tools
       for political theorists wishing to understand the current moment of deep and disori-
       entating change. Whereas Diehl focuses on two main issues that she says are forcing
       dominant imaginaries to mutate - the rise of the far-right and the encroachment of
       ‘post-truth’ versions of reality - the next two contributions by Sophia Hatzisavvi-
       dou and Carl Death turn to the issue of ecological breakdown and its implications
       for the political imagination. In contrast to Diehl, who implies the existence of one
       dominant political imaginary, both Hatzisavvidou and Carl Death emphasise the
       importance of a plurality of political imaginaries. Hatzisavvidou pointedly rejects
       the claim that there is a ‘deficit of imagination’ and places the blame on the material
       limits that restrict the circulation of alternative imaginaries of postgrowth, ecosocial-
       ist, ecofeminist and so on, that demand more equitable, inclusive and just forms of
       decision making. Death concurs with this diagnosis, focusing in his contribution on
       anti-colonial imaginaries that - if connected up to struggles for justice - hold out new
       possibilities. Drawing from the work of Achille Mbembe, Death calls for ‘imagina-
       tive leaps’ that can help in the destabilization of hierarchies but also emphasises that
       such ideational leaps must take place in a material terrain. Bringing together the
       ideational and material is precisely what Florian Malzacher identifies in his contribu-
       tion as being the political potential of theatre. The theatre, he argues, should not be
       regarded as a space that can help facilitate an escape from the present situation but
       rather a unique ‘training ground’ for both imagining different futures and engaging
       in more pragmatic, collective struggles that, nevertheless, push the limits of social
       and political procedures in the present. In the final contribution of this exchange,
       Oliver Marchart agrees with Malzacher that what is needed is new political means
       to expand our imagination, but he is sceptical that such expansion simply involves a
       sort of ‘artistic gymnastics’. He argues against utopian thinking among like-minded
       groups that he believes is often self-referential. What we need, he concludes, is a
       politics that takes on the hegemonic task of creating a leftist imaginary that gains the
       consent of as many people as possible. There is no point in finding new imaginaries
       if they don’t stick.                                  
         The contributions in this Critical Exchange do not provide a coherent answer to
       what the turn to the imagination means for contemporary political theory. Rather than
       offering one framework for understanding and engaging with political theory’s turn
       to the imagination, the contributions constitute possible starting points for a diverse,
       critical and political account of this ‘turn’. Our joint intent is, in line with Hawkins,
       ‘to offer moments to reflect and regroup and the chance to pause amidst what has of
       late been heady progress’ (2019, 966).                
       Cecilie Sachs Olsen and Amanda Machin                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 5 of 28 31
       The mutation of the political imaginary and the question of
       democracy                                             
                                                             
       In the last years, fast and deep social and political changes worldwide are taking
       place. Polycrisis, neo-fascism, digitalization and AI, for example, are indicative of
       deep transformations. There are new experiences and perceptions across the digital
       divide, which do not follow the logic of political institutions and are sometimes anti-
       political and post-truth. Both these changes deeply affect the way individuals and
       communities imagine society by undermining the democratic imaginary.
         What happens when the democratic imaginary flounders and fails? When the dom-
       inant political imaginary suffers massive erosion, society loses its contours and social
       and political institutions disintegrate. Symbols, language, patterns of perception and
       meaning-making no longer provide orientation. This is a mutation of the political
       imaginary and entails a transitory moment of insecurity and confusion, and it should
       be asked if such a moment has arisen today. If the answer is yes, many concepts of the
       social sciences, and especially of political science, lose their validity since the social
       reality they refer to are becoming unrecognisable. Scientific facts, democratic legiti-
       macy, human rights, political parties, representation and diplomacy do not provide
       orientation, quite the opposite. Contemporary political theorists too are left precari-
       ously without adequate conceptual tools for understanding the transitional moment.
       In times of profound transformations, it is important to attend to the political imagi-
       nary and its different elements. Only by studying the changing shape of the political
       imaginary can scholars think about the future of democracy and illuminate the black
       box of transformation. This is precisely the aim of this Critical Exchange.
         In my contribution here, I (re)turn to Cornelius Castoriadis, a key figure in what
       Sachs Olsen and Machin refer to above as ‘the turn to the imagination’, and to his
       insights that may be helpful in navigating the current period of disorientation and
       transformation. Following Castoriadis, I conceive the imaginary as a fundamental
       dimension of society that enables the emergence and stability of constructions of
       reality and encompasses the imaginative and creative capacities of human beings. It
       provides both the patterns for perception and meaning making of reality and a collec-
       tive repertoire of images, symbols, meanings, ideas and emotions (Diehl, 2015). The
       political imaginary, more specifically, constitutes the very conception of what politics
       is and what it should be, it allows political institutions to exist, political action to
       be effective and political representation to take place. By providing structures that
       enable us to make sense of the real, the political imaginary shapes the interactions
       and decisions of authorities, social movements and citizens, influencing political
       decisions and actions. However, the political imaginary is not completely fixed, there
       is always the potential for a radical moment of disruption and transformation that can
       be understood as “mutation” (Diehl, 2024).            
         Castoriadis’s understanding of the imaginary as magma, the distinction between
       the instituted and radical dimensions of the imaginary and the concept of “imaginary
       signification” provide heuristic tools for examining current social-political transfor-
       mations. Firstly, the metaphor of the magma describes the way the imaginary shapes
       (institutes) society and how it changes the institutions it made possible. By using
       the term magma, Castoriadis captures the fluidity and the emergence of the new:

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 6 of 28                        A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       transformation occurs when the magma gets hot, flowing and transforming the rela-
       tions between its components, changing the way meaning is made and altering the
       shape of society. By cooling down, the magma takes on a semi-solid form and its
       new structure consolidates, forming a new shape of the social-political. Yet, such
       a solidification is never completed. There are always fluid and semi-fluid layers in
       the magma able to transform its shape. Castoriadis, unfortunately, does not provide
       answers for the question of what makes the magma hot. Following sociology of
       knowledge, I accept that society’s transformations must be understood as a dialectic
       process between practices and knowledge formation (Diehl, 2015). Translated to the
       problem of mutation of the political imaginary, it means that symbolism, practices,
       political speech, cultural production and live arts are embedded in the imaginary and
       contribute to shaping the political imaginary. The rising of the far right and its fascist
       ideologemes on the one hand, and the new approach to social reality connected to
       digital communication and social media on the other, can be understood as two con-
       figurations emerging from the heating of the magma and also collaborating to heat
       the magma. The question is: how do they contribute to the new political imaginary
       which is already in the process of formation?         
         Secondly, Castoriadis (1987) distinguishes between two dimensions of the imagi-
       nary: the instituted and the radical imaginary. The instituted dimension provides pat-
       terns of interpretation of reality, builds structures and forms institutions. It is already
       materialized in the symbolic and becomes accessible to us through social and politi-
       cal institutions, symbols, discourses and institutionalized practices. Social sciences
       make the instituted imaginary comprehensible through their analysis. In the radical
       or instituting dimension, however, the imaginary can “create” new structures, mean-
       ings, symbolisms, modes of expression and perception, allowing “the ab ovo positing
       of […] an eidos”. (Castoriadis, 1991, 34) Although the radical imaginary is unreal-
       ized potentiality, it can transform and institute society anew. Deciphering the mani-
       festations of the radical imaginary is a hard task because they are not already fully
       materialized in an intelligible way. The radical imaginary escapes categorizations.
       It remains uncontrollable, virtual and potential without yet being realized (Diehl,
       2024). When society is mutating, the interplay between the two dimensions of the
       imaginary become particularly dynamic. If my assumption is correct, this is exactly
       the situation scholars are experiencing today. Narrowed down to the question of the
       far right and post-truth, the work to be done is to first examine how both affect the
       materialization of the political imaginary at the instituted level and second which
       phantasies, emotions, desires they liberate and generate, so that new imaginary sig-
       nifications can be formed.                            
         Third, the concept of imaginary signification is crucial for deciphering the muta-
       tion of the political imaginary. Semiotically speaking, imaginary significations do not
       refer to something already existent, they are performative in the sense that they create
       the object they refer to (Diehl, 2015). God, for example, does not exist previously
       of the belief in God, it is created by imagination. This is also the case for popular
       sovereignty in democracy. The notion of sovereignty does not exist until its symbolic
       creation. Yet, imaginary significations have a particularity. They have a structuring
       power and are capable to set their own modes of perception and of sense-making.
       They are major organizational units, structure beliefs and knowledge and generate

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 7 of 28 31
                                                             
       institutions (Castoriadis, 1987). In order to be performative effective, imaginary sig-
       nifications are symbolically expressed. Claude Lefort (1988) calls this expression
       mise en scène of society, society (re)presents itself, creating meaning and giving
       itself sense and shape. During the mutation of the political imaginary, consolidated
       imaginary significations come into a crisis, lose their organizational capacity and
       validity and become unable to provide guidance in making sense of socio-political
       reality (Diehl, 2024). With the crisis of the current political imaginary, the space
       for the creation of new imaginary significations opens up and new structures can be
       performatively constructed. During the revolutions of the 18th century, representative
       democracy - as a dominant political imaginary - generated crucial imaginary signi-
       fications for its representation (Diehl, 2015): popular sovereignty, freedom, equality
       and human rights (Lefort, 1988). Using Castoriadis’s notion of imaginary significa-
       tion allow us to better understand how these primary references are not only being
       challenged, but actually eroded.                      
         If my suspicion is right, in the current moment the transformations of the politi-
       cal imaginary are so profound that society’s shape, patterns of perception, normative
       horizon and the way to make sense of the real are coming into a crisis. Following
       Hannah Arendt (1958), imagination of the future and its symbolic expressions are
       crucial for democracy and for creating new alternatives for living together. Arendt’s
       conception of democracy as a collective symbolic activity directed towards the ques-
       tion of how people want to live in a collectivity, stressing the communicative inter-
       active character of public space. For this, society needs a common ground, a shared
       imaginary, capable of providing a place for the different perspectives and answers to
       the way a collectivity wants to live together. Imaginary significations supply a first
       structure for it, but they can be differently interpreted, giving birth to distinctive sub-
       imaginaries. They can also be contested or shifted as in authoritarianism or fascism,
       or they may even vanish, which could be the case in a post-truth perception of the
       world. In this post-truth condition, the political imaginary is increasingly fragmented
       and emerging sub-imaginaries’ that ties to the political imaginary become too thin to
       guarantee a common ground. Hence, no notion of truth and reality can be shared by
       the members of a society anymore.                     
         Far-right imagination and post-truth attitudes seem to me to be the major agents
       of the current mutation because they deeply affect the imaginary significations of
       democracy. The problem they pose is that both operate in contrast to democratic
       imagination. Far-right ideologies entail core fascist ideologemes which damage two
       of the four democratic imaginary significations in a first step: the notion of equality
       and of human rights. Both are now eroding, facing far-right migration discourses
       and policies. In a second step, far-right ideologies attack freedom. This is already
       the case in countries where authoritarian measures have been implemented. Finally,
       the democratic principle of popular sovereignty is shifted towards the leader’s sov-
       ereignty (Diehl, 2015) as it was the case of fascism in Italy and national-socialism
       in Germany. Moreover, far-right movements and fascism attempt to fix society’s
       imagination (Lefort, 1988) and prevent the radical imaginary to nourish the instituted
       imaginary with new ideas and visions. The problem of the far right and fascism is that
       they block the Arendtian question of living together by establishing a social-political

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 8 of 28                        A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       form which is intended to rest forever. In the same line, they construct the people’s
       identity as unchangeable character and on homogenic unity.
         In the case of post-truth, the problem is different. Post-truth erodes the very com-
       mon ground for collective imagination and negotiation, bypassing the notion of a
       social construction of reality. The whole idea of alternative facts is based on the
       assumption that there is no such thing as collectively shaped and recognized reality
       or truth. Therefore, there is no lie either. According to Trump’s former adviser Kelly-
       anne Conway, the visibly small size of the crowd in Trump’s first inauguration, when
       compared to the photos of the inauguration of his predecessor, did not provide any
       guidance for establishing what the reality was. As a consequence, Trump’s statement
       that his crowd was bigger was not a lie or falsehood, but simply an alternative fact.
       Without a common notion of reality there is no common ground for democracy. The
       assumption that reality is just a manner of individual preference and is not a collec-
       tive and an interpersonal construction renders Arendt’s democratic question of how
       we want to live irrelevant.                           
         The symptomatic tendencies described above seem to be more than a new political
       crisis but to affect democracy as a whole. It is a crisis of democratic imagination and
       of the political imaginary. As a crisis of imagination, it blocks the imagination of the
       new. As a crisis of the democratic imaginary, it erodes the imaginary significations on
       which democracy is anchored. Both deeply affect the way individuals and collectivi-
       ties perceive, imagine and make sense of society.     
         The task for political theorists is to examine these processes along with other dis-
       ciplines and arts in order to reflect their possible effects on democracy. More research
       is urgently needed to better understand how political imaginaries stimulate and shape
       social change and how the references of democratic representation are eroding or
       transfiguring. If Castoriadis provides social scientists with formative concepts about
       the role of the imaginary in instituting society, about social-political transformation
       processes, and about the way the social-political takes shape through imaginary sig-
       nifications, social and political science would profit from it by adopting and refining
       Castoriadis’s concepts as a framework in their own field. On the methodological
       level, these concepts are well-equipped to analyze formations of the instituted imagi-
       nary such as discourse, symbolism, social practices and norms. The question is how
       to examine not-fully consolidated new structures that can give hints about possible
       imaginary significations in the future shape of society. This contribution provided
       some tools for it by taking on Castoriadis’s concepts of magma, radical and insti-
       tuted imaginaries, and imaginary significations. Methodologically, as this Critical
       Exchange demonstrates, new interdisciplinary approaches are required in order to
       address the imaginal, emotional and aesthetic aspects of social life that influence and
       challenge prevailing imaginaries, while fostering the emergence of new ones.
       Paula Diehl                                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 9 of 28 31
       Ecopolitical imaginaries: limits, lack, and abundance 
                                                             
       The accumulation of excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere creates immense pres-
       sures on the Earth System and unique challenges for human societies. Whereas Paula
       Diehl’s text above focuses on the transformation of a political imaginary in relation
       to contemporary issues of post-truth and the far right, I am concerned with what
       I call ‘ecopolitical imaginaries’ that circulate in response to environmental issues
       such as climate change and biodiversity loss. For theorists and activists of environ-
       mental politics, imagination is a key tool through which they can envision alterna-
       tive, more just and less violent ecopolitical arrangements. Beyond analysing the key
       concepts, ideologies, and political ideas underpinning existing arrangements, envi-
       ronmental political theorists can envisage alternative ecopolitical imaginaries for
       sustainable futures (Hatzisavvidou, 2025). Such imaginaries can inform expectations
       and desires, organise social meaning and transformative action, mobilise alternative
       worldviews, epistemologies, emotions, and technologies, and foster understanding of
       the actions and decisions necessary to fabricate sustainable futures. In other words,
       as Carl Death also argues in his contribution to this Critical Exchange, they play a
       key role in advancing material struggles and demands and in constructing alternative
       worlds we are invited to enter and inhabit (Hatzisavvidou, 2024). No wonder, then,
       that, as Sachs Olsen and Machin observe above, imagination is presented as being
       able to ‘rescue’ the future from the present: it is a political resource that can help
       agents of political change to craft more compelling images of the future, beyond the
       confines of the present conditions.                   
         Nonetheless, the exact place of imagination in politics is not universally agreed
       upon. As the vibrant debate on what is referred to in this Critical Exchange as ‘the
       turn to imagination’ demonstrates, analysts disagree on ‘how much’ imagination is
       necessary or enough. On the one hand, the overreliance on imagination can turn into
       a ‘magical signifier’ that delegates, all responsibility to the human faculty of imagina-
       tion when what is most needed is a sober analysis of the political conjuncture. On the
       other hand, a perceived ‘crisis of imagination’ can emerge from the failure to adapt
       ‘the political’ to the new climatic conditions (Mann & Wainwright, 2018). Here, I
       want to argue that the issue today is not that we lack imagination but that the analyti-
       cal and political gaze has been focused on the wrong terrain. Crucially, imagination
       doesn’t necessarily guarantee better—more democratic, equitable or sustainable—
       political outcomes. In building this argument, I want to suggest that there are material
       and institutional limits to the role that imagination can have in politics, which emerge
       from historical and geopolitical relations and tensions that cannot be easily overcome
       and constrain what is possible. Despite the abundance of ecopolitical imaginaries we
       encounter today, existing powerful structures, mechanisms, and relations block and
       prevent these imaginaries from flourishing. If the task of political theorists (among
       others) is to consider existing arrangements, assess the implications of anticipated or
       possible policies and practices, and envision better political societies, then the limita-
       tions posed by material conditions, including biophysical, socio-economic, and geo-
       political conditions and structures, raise questions on the extent to which imagination
       can really inform the task of theorising.             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 10 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
         The case of the international climate negotiations (COPs—Conferences of the Par-
       ties) organised by the United Nations is a useful relay point to explore these tensions
       and limits. One of the outcomes produced in the context of these summits (organised
       annually since 1995) is a ‘net zero imaginary’ that has been popularised in the last
       years. Introduced as a response to the pressures that a changing climate entails for
       human societies and economies, this imaginary cascaded through the international
       system in 2019–2020 (Van Coppenolle, Blondeel, and Van De Graaf 2023) and was
       relatively quickly institutionalised and inscribed in policies, investments, and laws.
       One way to understand the emergence of this ecopolitical imaginary is as the out-
       come of collectively imagining how to bridge the politically possible with the bio-
       physically necessary. The task of collectively imagining a future with less harmful
       gases in the Earth’s atmosphere was orchestrated and delivered by different epistemic
       communities—scientific, political, entrepreneurial, and activist—brought together in
       the context of COPs. I propose that attending critically to these climate summits can
       help to illustrate the limits of imagination as a tool for exploring possibilities for
       future ecopolitical arrangements.                     
         Although such instances of collective imagination can be seen as a necessary step
       towards forging a widely accepted and desirable ecopolitical imaginary, in its current
       inception the net zero imaginary runs the risk of becoming unpopular and unde-
       sired. More specifically, the net zero imaginary requires rapidly mobilising natural
       resources such as critical minerals, mostly abundant in some of the planet’s most
       deprived and marginalised areas. The existing economic and political arrangements,
       which are established upon historical precedents and injustices, have enabled the
       disproportionate and unjust exploitation of these areas and their human and more-
       than-human components, creating ‘green sacrifice zones’ that shift risks associated
       with extraction to these areas and reproduce the logic of coloniality (Zografos &
       Robbins, 2020). Ultimately, the materiality of the prevailing political economy of the
       ‘green transition’ necessitates continuing exploitative and discriminatory economic
       and political practices. In its unfolding, the net zero imaginary by design conditions
       the materialisation of unjust and undesired futures, thus leaving unchanged the power
       structures that enabled it. For example, the extraction and processing of critical min-
       erals such as Lithium and Nickel required for the development of ‘clean’ energy
       technologies exacerbate political conflicts, socio-economic inequalities, and environ-
       mental degradation in areas with historically marginalised communities in South East
       Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Even though the net zero imaginary emerged as the
       outcome of collectively imagining a more sustainable future—a process that has been
       taking place for several years at the highest international level of political decision-
       making—the outcome is not a more just socio-economic order. The complexity of
       geopolitical dynamics and material needs—past, present, and future—hinders the
       role that imagination can have in politics, as a process of reconfiguring power rela-
       tions towards equitable and inclusive futures.        
         It could be argued that this impasse confirms the ‘crisis of imagination’ thesis.
       This is the diagnosis of scholars who lament the lack of adaptation of ‘the politi-
       cal’ to the planetary emergency (Davoudi & Brooks, 2021; Mann & Wainwright,
       2018; Norgaard, 2018; Wapner & Elver, 2016). Nonetheless, there is an argument
       to be made that this diagnosis is too focused on a specific cosmology that accepts

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 11 of 28 31
                                                             
       as legitimate only canonical sources of political knowledge and imagination. There
       is a rich stream of social and political thought infused by cosmologies and episte-
       mologies that call alternative viewpoints and practices into attention. For example,
       certain indigenous imaginaries can disrupt the predominant linear understanding of
       temporality and, with it, the argument of future socio-ecological collapse while at the
       same time putting forward ecopolitical imaginaries that can help us envision net zero
       futures underpinned and sustained by multi-scalar, multi-species solidarities (Mitch-
       ell & Chaudhury, 2020). Africanfuturist fiction, for instance, tells multispecies stories
       shaped by yet transcending industrial modernity, allowing us to envision posthuman
       ecological futures that decentre human agency (Death, 2022b). Considering this plu-
       riverse of knowledges, perspectives, and possibilities, it can be argued that there is
       an excess of imagination (Bottici, 2011). This excess takes the form of a paradox,
       whereby images of alternatives overwhelmingly mediate politics, and at the same
       time, there seems to be a lack of imagination in the sense of the capacity to question
       what is given. Rather than a lack of imagination, the issue is the existing arrangement
       of power relations and how it prevents the adaptation of ‘the political’ towards more
       just and less violent ecopolitical future arrangements.
         In climate politics, this abundance of imagination is played out in the way a mul-
       titude of ecopolitical imaginaries compete with the dominant net zero imaginary for
       acceptance today. Among these imaginaries, which have different degrees of impact
       in the course of things, one can discern a technocapitalist imaginary advanced by
       Silicon Valley green entrepreneurs (Dillet & Hatzisavvidou, 2021), an apocalyptic
       imaginary endorsed by eco-miserabilists (Thaler, 2024), a postgrowth imaginary
       envisioned by those who reject the primacy of economic growth as an organising
       principle of human societies (Feola, 2019). These imaginaries, along with the vari-
       ous ecosocialist, ecofeminist, decolonial, ecofascist, and ecoanarchist ones that strive
       for recognition today, play a vital role in the public sphere, shaping political views,
       behavioural changes, and emotional responses to social and biophysical events. The
       contestation between these imaginaries reminds us, as Sachs Olsen and Machin points
       out in the introduction to this exchange, that there is nothing inherently democratic or
       progressive about imagination. Far-right political actors also employ imagination in
       advancing their oppressive and exclusionary ideas and politics, as illustrated by the
       resurgence of the far-right imaginaries that Diehl discusses above. Rather than a ‘cri-
       sis on imagination’, we experience what Death in this Critical Exchange calls a ‘fes-
       tival of the imagination’, in which some voices participate more loudly than others.
         The impact of these unequal power relations and how they prevent transformation
       can be observed in international climate summits. To a certain extent, the criticism
       that COPs are ‘no longer fit for purpose’ is justified, with climate policy experts point-
       ing to the need to reform them in order to integrate accountability better and enhance
       equitable representation (Dixson-Declève et al., 2024). Nonetheless, these instances
       of collective imagining offer a stage where the competition between different eco-
       political imaginaries is played out today. On one level, questions around the imple-
       mentation of the net zero imaginary dominate the procedural aspect of the process,
       which focuses on discussions around climate finance and technology transfer. But on
       a deeper level, representatives of climatically vulnerable, historically marginalised,
       and disproportionally burdened nations project their differing priorities, advocating

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 12 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       for more urgency in climate mitigation and adaptation, increasingly questioning the
       format of the negotiations. These criticisms draw on these representatives’ view of
       the COPs as mechanisms for perpetuating colonialism and other forms of exclusion
       and oppression (Sultana, 2022). Grounded in indigenous, place-based, and traditional
       cosmologies and perspectives, these representatives and activists advance ecopoliti-
       cal imaginaries that contest and decentralize the dominant net zero imaginary and
       the Western-centric epistemology that underpins it. The COPs are indeed theatrical
       performances, as they are frequently described in the press and elsewhere. The idea
       of ‘theatricality’ alludes here to the negative dynamics of performance as something
       artificial, dishonest and inauthentic (Rai et al., 2021). But rather than the theatricality
       of the COPs being necessarily a negative development, it can also be taken at face
       value and seen as a way to reify a particular imaginary. It is because of and through its
       being performed at the COPs that the net zero imaginary gains traction and credence
       today. As Malzacher explains in this Critical Exchange, the power of performance as
       a medium of the present is that it allows imaginaries to be grounded in the here and
       now.                                                  
         The discussion around COP reform provides a fitting opportunity for political
       theorists to consider how to engage with the limits and ambiguities of imagination in
       politics. To envision what an inclusive, equitable, and effective climate policy deci-
       sion-making process could look like in the future, political theorists can turn to imag-
       inary depictions of sustainable futures and institutions to materialise them. Climate
       fiction, theatre, and performances such as Bruno Latour’s and Frédérique Aït-Toua-
       ti’s “Theater of Negotiation” and Rimini Protokoll’s “World Climate Conference”
       provide a rich terrain for exploring how different scenarios can be materialised, what
       trade-offs are required, as well as what possible alliances could lead to more widely
       accepted visions of the future (Hatzisavvidou, 2025). Following how the compe-
       tition between different ecopolitical imaginaries can be negotiated in performative
       representations offers a way to mobilise mental pictures for, as well as embodied
       experiences of, future institutional arrangements. Even if these kinds of ‘trainings’
       (Malzacher, this exchange) do not guarantee that material limits to the imagination
       can be transgressed, it may help craft ecopolitical imaginaries that appeal to broader
       constituencies. For such a project of constructing hegemony to be truly equitable and
       transformative, it would need to move beyond justice in terms of recognition and
       participation, towards reparative and distributional justice. This shift would better
       reflect the demands and needs of those historically marginalised and excluded from
       dominant ecopolitical imaginaries. Their own imaginaries can help understand and
       potentially transform the limits of the current imagination.
       Sophia Hatzisavvidou                                  
       Challenging Eurocentricity and reimagining postcolonial futures
       The two contributions above highlight the profound changes occurring around the
       world that are apparently leading to a state of existential and intersecting crises.
       Sophia Hatzisavvidou highlights the prospect of climate catastrophe and ecologi-
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 13 of 28 31
                                                             
       cal breakdown and Paula Diehl emphasises the resurgence of the far-right and the
       impact of post-truth on liberal democracy. We can add to these crises the accelerating
       concentration of wealth in oligarchies and stuttering progress (at best) on poverty
       alleviation. According to Achille Mbembe, ‘[m]ore than ever, the world is dominated
       by the spectre of its own end and by the fear of obliteration and extinction’ (Mbembe
       & Sarr, 2023, ix; see also Mbembe, 2019, 27-29).      
         During particularly bleak political episodes it is very tempting to ask ‘what’s the
       point in imagining alternatives?’ Critics of ‘the turn to the imagination’ frequently
       allege that to retreat from ‘real world politics’ and ‘sober analysis’ into imagining
       alternatives to the status quo is naïve and escapist. As Sachs Olsen and Machin argue
       above, it is easy to see how ‘the turn to the imagination’ could be accused of over-
       looking the challenges in promoting and achieving change. Oliver Marchart goes as
       far as referring to appeals to the imagination as invoking a ‘magical’ vision of a way
       out of ‘our current misery’. Advocates of more realist politics, like Marchart, suggest
       that ‘the call for more and better (in the sense of more radical) imagination could be
       part of the problem, rather than the solution.’ In terms of climate change, scholars
       like Robyn Eckersley (2021) and Richard Beardsworth (2020) advocate for more
       pragmatic and realist politics, rather than focusing on new political imaginations.
         These critiques of appeals to reimagine politics are understandable but mistaken,
       in my view. In this short contribution I want to make two main points. First, the
       radical imagination is a necessary but not sufficient element of transformative politi-
       cal struggle. Second, rather than decrying the ‘turn to the imagination’, we should
       instead focus our critique on the violent and Othering dimensions of dominant imagi-
       naries and seek to strengthen and advance anti-colonial imaginaries, especially in the
       domain of contemporary climate politics.              
         The argument that the turn to the imagination is a distraction, or a symptom of the
       dead-end of emancipatory politics, seems to me to rest on an overly stark distinction
       between ‘real world’ political action and abstract, ideational wishful thinking. As
       E.H. Carr observed in 1939, ‘all healthy thought must establish a balance between
       utopia and reality, between free will and determinism’ (Carr, 2001, 12). All political
       action, all political struggle necessarily involves imagining alternatives to the status
       quo, as well as action to seek to implement those alternatives. Here I agree that there
       are important questions about the balance between utopianism and realism, but it is
       important not to forget that all political struggles, all practices of strategizing, organ-
       ising, and the articulation of counter-hegemonic projects, involve a necessary ele-
       ment of imagination. The concept of the political imaginary is useful here because it
       insists on the collective and (at least partially) institutionalised character of imagined
       worldviews. Whilst it is possible to reduce ‘the imagination’ to an individual faculty,
       imaginaries are always socially shared and collectively mediated. The overlapping
       and competing political imaginaries that constitute our world are not wished into
       existence by artists and activists out of nowhere, rather they are embedded in institu-
       tions, materialised through practices, and advanced through struggle. They are com-
       modified, legislated and debated: in short, imaginaries are never entirely immaterial.
         As such, attempts to frame theoretical debates over questions such as – do we
       need more pragmatic realism or more utopian idealism? – are at best contingent and
       subjective, and at worst rhetorical attempts to close-down spaces for different ways

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 14 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       of thinking. The most important questions are instead: Which specific imaginaries are
       most powerful, how and with what consequences? What can be done to strengthen
       and realise more progressive and radical imaginaries? In terms of climate politics,
       as Sophia Hatzisavvidou shows (above), the dominant net zero imaginary – materi-
       alised through new forms of extractivism and green sacrifice zones – is reproducing
       violent, hierarchical, racialised and colonial power structures. Struggles against this
       imaginary must be simultaneously ideational and material.
         This net zero imaginary – itself the focus of a powerful backlash from more pro-
       methean political imaginaries that reject the need for curtailing greenhouse gas emis-
       sions in the short-term – rests upon a view of the future in which there are transitions
       to more environmentally sustainable energy, food, transport and waste systems that
       do not seriously transform underlying structures of political power and economic
       wealth. As such, they rely upon the perpetuation of current patterns of exploitation
       and violence. Wind and solar energy, for example, require increased extraction of
       natural resources, especially minerals, from the Global South. It is easy to envis-
       age techno-authoritarian ‘solutions’ to climate change that rely on secured borders,
       policed populations, an expanded military-industrial complex and the sacrifice of
       vast swathes of the Majority World to drought, heat, floods and pollution.
         It is striking how many realist and sober strategies for surviving climate change
       rely upon the casual abandonment, or the violent exploitation, of very large sections
       of the global human population. In one example, Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway’s
       (2014) ‘future history’ is a fictional exploration of the collapse of western civilisation
       due to climate denial. They narrate an imagined path to recovery, reliant upon a mir-
       acle new ‘pitch-black lichen’ discovered in the 2090s that can consume atmospheric
       CO2 very efficiently, coinciding with a ‘Grand Solar Minimum’ that reduces incom-
       ing solar radiation. In these developments, they conclude, ‘Humanity was fortunate’
       (Oreskes & Conway, 2014, 33). In this imagined and fortunate future, ‘survivors in
       northern inland regions of Europe, Asia, and North America, as well as inland and
       high-altitude regions of South America’ are able to regroup and rebuild. Barely paus-
       ing for breath, the authors add that ‘[t]he human populations of Australia and Africa,
       of course, were wiped out’ (Oreskes & Conway, 2014, 33). In another example, Kim
       Stanley Robinson’s novel Ministry for the Future (2020) sets out to try to imagine
       a survivable route through climate breakdown and environmental catastrophe, yet
       the story opens with a cataclysmic heat-wave in India that is literally world-ending
       for millions. Critiques of the novel have noted that its assumptions about tempo-
       rality, non-human nature, and indigeneity mean that it ‘fails to offer an imaginary
       that challenges the Eurocentric universalism of international climate institutionalism’
       (Hatzisavvidou, 2024, 18).                            
         The crucial issue here is not how realistic (or not) these imagined futures are. The
       problem is that such imaginaries resonate so deeply and widely because of the ways
       in which they invoke and reproduce the racialised imaginaries that produced and
       legitimated slavery and colonialism. Liberal democracy and carboniferous capitalism
       were made possible through the expropriation and evisceration of the Global South,
       and colonialism was legitimated by powerful imaginaries that instituted racialised,
       classed and gendered hierarchies. Critical engagement with the ‘turn to the imagina-
       tion’ should foreground the violent and Othering dimensions of dominant imaginar-

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 15 of 28 31
                                                             
       ies, rather than simply suggesting that attempts to reimagine political horizons are
       futile or naïve.                                      
         Postcolonial theory – from Aimé Césaire and Frantz Fanon to Gayatri Chakra-
       vorty Spivak and Edward Said – has shown how European colonialism relied upon
       racialised, hierarchical and violent imaginaries. Achille Mbembe, one of the most
       influential contemporary African political theorists, is particularly helpful in high-
       lighting the role of political imaginaries in the past, present and future. Drawing on
       Castoriadis as well as Lacan, Mbembe (2017, 32) has argued that racism, for example,
       is a ‘structure of the imagination’ with real, material, world-constituting effects. Slav-
       ery, the plantation and colonialism were tightly bound together as an assemblage of
       racial capitalism, and the dehumanising and hierarchical energy systems they enabled
       prefigure fossil fuel-powered capitalism and modern democracy (Mbembe, 2019).
       African slaves on trans-Atlantic voyages ‘were the first coal shovelers of our moder-
       nity’, the ‘ambulant suns’ that powered New World plantations (Mbembe, 2017, 37;
       2019, 165-166). The political imaginaries that underpinned colonialism and slavery
       have strong continuities with contemporary imaginaries, Mbembe (2019, 43-44) sug-
       gests, and we can see the construction of racialised Others as constitutive of demo-
       cratic normality in European and American migration policies, Covid-19 responses,
       and the genocidal violence of the Israeli state in Palestine (Coates, 2025, 2-3).
         The crucial question that emerges for Mbembe, drawing on Fanon, is whether our
       political imaginaries can be decolonised and new futures opened up: ‘[c]an we really
       talk of moving beyond colonialism?’ (Mbembe, 2001, 237). Can we, both human and
       nonhuman, ‘found a relation with others based on the reciprocal recognition of our
       common vulnerability and finitude?’ (Mbembe, 2019, 3). This is both an incitement
       to reimagine politics, as well as an imaginative leap in political theorising. The task is
       challenging, but Mbembe sees great potential in imaginaries that challenge Eurocen-
       trism. Artistic creativity and political contestation are both important, for Mbembe,
       in the ‘resurgence of epic stories’ and the ‘celebration of the imagination produced
       by struggle’ (Mbembe, 2019, 141). Radical decolonisation requires a ‘festival of the
       imagination,’ he argues (Mbembe, 2019, 139). His argument for ‘more imaginative’
       political theory is not framed in abstract terms, demanding an increase in intellectual
       pluralism and democratic diversity for their own sake. Rather, Mbembe argues that
       an imaginative leap is needed in political praxis in order to decolonise established
       imaginaries. An example here is the articulation of anti-colonial de-growth imaginar-
       ies as a challenge to technocratic and depoliticised net zero imaginaries.
         Art and aesthetics are crucial elements of Mbembe’s philosophical method.
       Through his expansive and ambitiously wide-ranging commentary on literary fic-
       tion, art, and African experiences of war, migration, sexuality and digitalization, he
       discerns the emergence of new and alternative imaginaries that can help us to rethink
       ways to live alongside each other, human and nonhuman, in-common. These imagi-
       naries are not opposed to or distinct from material reality. Rather, life is constituted
       through an ‘oscillation between the real and the imaginary, the imaginary realized
       and the real imagined’ (Mbembe, 2001, 242).           
         Mbembe’s method and his emphasis on imaginative decolonisation can help illu-
       minate lines of research into both dominant and alternative imaginaries. Reflecting
       on fiction can bring some of the limitations and violences of dominant imaginaries

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 16 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       into clearer focus – as in the examples above from Robinson, Oreskes and Conway –
       as well as mapping out spaces for subjugated imaginaries and alternative futures. In
       Florian Malzacher’s contribution below, he shows how theatre can be a ‘paradoxical
       machine’ for enacting political interventions that are simultaneously material and
       ideational. This is a view of artistic practice as a site (or stage) for ‘training’ audi-
       ences and communities in ways that are both pragmatic and utopian.
         In my own research I have sought to explore the potential for Africanfuturist
       climate fiction to challenge and reimagine ecopolitical imaginaries. Reading sto-
       ries from different cultural backgrounds and perspectives can change our view of
       the places, temporalities, ecologies and politics of climate futures (Death, 2025).
       Through the climate fiction of authors such as Nnedi Okorafor, Lauren Beukes and
       Tlotlo Tsamaase, for example, we can imagine posthuman futures of shape-shifting,
       more-than-human conviviality, and radically transformed ethical relations to the
       other species who live within and around us. These imaginative leaps can help in,
       among other things, destabilising the hierarchies through which diverse other sub-
       jects have been denied the status of full humanity – women, transgender, intersex,
       queer, disabled, neurodiverse, racialised and others – and suggest more capacious and
       inclusive imagined subjectivities for climate-changed futures. Yet, for them to have
       political salience they must be connected up to real-world struggles for climate jus-
       tice and reparations, more-than-human conviviality and anti-colonial posthumanism.
         Through such aesthetic methods it is possible to imagine quite radical challenges
       to Eurocentrism in political theory. Not just in the sense of adding in alternative
       perspectives to the existing canon of political theory, but rather by illuminating
       the constitutive role violence, colonialism and human degradation have played in
       producing capitalist modernity and liberal democracy. As Amy Niang (2016, 458)
       reflects, there have been plenty of attempts to seek out ‘African perspectives’ as if
       ‘non-African perspectives, particularly Western perspectives, were inherently good
       and right and that all we needed to do was to append our African views on things.’
       Such an approach leaves Eurocentrism and coloniality unchallenged, whereas a radi-
       cal Fanonian imaginary has – in the hands of Mbembe – the potential to ‘provin-
       cialise Europe’ (Mbembe, 2021, 225).                  
         Translating anti-colonial imaginaries into political practice – and vice versa –
       requires social struggle and different forms of political power. In terms of the actual
       political impact of the decolonial agenda, Mbembe (2021, 77-79, 169) has been
       sceptical of whether curriculum reform, the uncritical ‘inclusion’ of indigenous
       knowledge or African languages, or the restitution of looted African artefacts held in
       Western museums and galleries will entail meaningful decolonisation. Yet anti-colo-
       nial imaginaries have changed the world in the past and are doing so in the present.
       They are locked into conflict with contrasting political imaginaries, just as radical
       social movements are up against reactionary movements, over a terrain of struggle
       that is always simultaneously ideational and material.
       Carl Death                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 17 of 28 31
       Theatres of pragmatic utopias                         
                                                             
                                                             
         “We better start telling another [story], which maybe people can go on with
         when the old one’s finished. Maybe.” (Le Guin, 2019 [1986], 33)
                                                             
       Live arts like theatre, performance, and choreography are mediums of the present,
       not the future. Their imaginaries do not carry too far into the fictional realm, one foot
       always stays in the here and now. By this live arts offer an imagination that is perhaps
       less radical than that of other artistic genres such as climate fiction. Nevertheless,
       these artforms might help bridging the gap between the ideational and material, as
       called for by Death above, in a time where we seem to suffer from too much radical
       imagination just as much as of the lack of it.        
         For some time now, radical imagination has become an all-purpose answer for
       thinking about the potential of politically engaged art:’[It] is the ability to imagine
       the world, life, and social institutions not as they are but as they might otherwise be.
       It is the courage and the intelligence to recognize that the world can and should be
       changed; wrote Max Haiven and Alex Khasnabish already in 2014, in the wake of
       the Arab Spring and Occupy Wall Street: ‘The radical imagination is not just about
       dreaming of different futures. It’s about bringing those possibilities back from the
       future to work on the present, to inspire action and new forms of solidarity today’
       (2014, 3).                                            
         A decade later, however, ‘bringing those possibilities back from the future to work
       on the present’ has taken on a very different tone than at the times of Arab Spring
       and Occupy Wall Street. Radical imagination has indeed managed to successfully
       intervene in our lives in ways that seem to come from the future: D.O.G.E., Mars exit
       plans, high tech wars, dreams of a Gaza Stripe wellness resort and an undestroyable
       belief in technical solutions for the climate catastrophe – we live radical imagina-
       tion in mainstream politics mainly as a nightmare, while progressive ideas in art
       and activism seem like old-fashioned fairy tales from a distant past. But perhaps the
       even bigger problem is that both the destructive ideas of the right and the desire for a
       truly revolutionary imagination on the left are diverting our attention from what we
       should be concerned with: the here and now. The right by throwing smoke bombs, the
       left by encouraging escapism disguised as political engagement. So, the over-quoted
       Jameson/Zizek/Fisher aphorism still holds true: the techno-libertarian fantasies that
       are turning current politics on its head make it even easier to imagine the end of the
       world and even more difficult to imagine the end of capitalism. But maybe it is rather
       the response than the analysis that has to change: perhaps we need to give up the race
       for the most radical imagination for a while – and focus instead on how to get out of
       the current mess. This is not about dismissing the necessity of critical imagination
       generally, but to realize that in order to imagine that we can act at all, we might need
       pragmatic utopias with goals within a visible political horizon.
         Radical imagination as an artistic notion is closely related to concepts of “the
       political” as it is used by post-fundamentalist thinkers (Marchart, 2010) such as Jean-
       Luc Nancy, Alain Badiou, Claude Lefort or – with different terminology – Jacques
       Rancière. The radical imagination denotes the unpragmatic, the unfiltered, the imme-

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 18 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       diate, and is a clearly more appealing aspect of political than its counterpart; the
       concept of “politics”, which describes the concrete area of state functions and state
       action (parties, government, etc.). In this context the notion of pragmatic utopias, as I
       want to develop it here, marks a middle ground between these two concepts.
         But actually “middle ground” is not quite accurate: the artistic practices I am dis-
       cussing here – arguing from a position of performing arts theory and practice rather
       than political theory – are both spheres for utopian thinking while simultaneously
       walking knee deep through the mud of present compromise. Mud one inevitably gets
       into when taking collaboration, negotiation, and participation seriously.
         Theatre is – more than any other artistic medium – a medium of pragmatics. The
       permanent possibility of mistakes, glitches, and loss of control are not unavoidable
       flaws but the core of the medium. Instead of ignoring these obstacles, embracing
       them is a key strategy for creating a tension that emphasizes its very aliveness. This
       proximity to the unexpected has conceptional, even philosophical consequences but
       very concrete reasons: always involving many people, always being collaborative
       (even though the hierarchies between director, actor, scenographer, technicians etc.
       might be strong), always trying to create alternative worlds with analogue means, and
       most of all, always being a medium where the reception of the artwork happens in the
       very moment it is produced. No photoshopping possible. Theatre refers directly to the
       shared present, to the time spent together by the artists and spectators. Live arts are
       always in negotiation, they are always contaminated by their own realpolitik.
         Theatre is a paradoxical machine in which things are real and imaginary, material
       and ideational, at the same time. It creates (rather than only represents) social situ-
       ations and practices that are actual and symbolic at once. Through framing, theatre
       offers the possibility of partaking while at the same time watching oneself from the
       outside. It is, if you wish, in itself a compromise of reality and fiction. These are
       the prerequisites for a theatre that has become in recent years the setting for a wide
       variety of social assemblies that walk the tightrope between art and reality, a demo-
       cratic arena built on a foundation of pragmatic utopian imagination. Trials delivering
       verdicts on artistic freedom, religion, and censorship (Milo Rau’s ‘Moscow Trials’
       or the German ‘NSU Tribunals’); summits convened to wrestle with climate goals
       (Bruno Latour’s and Frédérique Aït-Touati’s ‘Theater of Negotiation’, Rimini Proto-
       koll’s ‘World Climate Conference’) or cultural policy (Public Movement’s ‘Make Art
       Policy’); parliaments that give a voice to the otherwise voiceless (Jonas Staal’s ‘New
       World Summit’). By using theatre’s ability to create temporary communities (one of
       its unique selling point as an artistic medium) defined by space, time, and shifting
       rules, these forms of theatre not only reflect society, but also become a container for
       trying out, analyzing, performing, representing, testing, pushing the limits of, and
       even reinventing social and political procedures.     
         Many of these assemblies provide small scale arenas for pluralistic, passionate and
       contestatory politics. This is vital for democracy because, as Chantal Mouffe argues
       in her theory of agonistic politics ‘if we want people to be free we must always allow
       for the possibility that conflict may appear and to provide an arena where differences
       can be confronted. The democratic process should supply that arena’ (quoted in Cas-
       tle, 1998). In a time when, on the one hand, George W. Bush’s dictum ‘If you’re not
       with us, you’re against us’ - currently radicalized by Donald Trump – is experienc-

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 19 of 28 31
                                                             
       ing a surprising resurgence across the political spectrum, and on the other hand, the
       logic of consensus continues to suppress many democratic debates, theatre can serve
       as an agonistic space. Here, playful (yet serious) disagreement, as it is advocated by
       Mouffe, not only keeps contradictions alive, but above all allows them to be articu-
       lated freely. After all, it is no coincidence that the word agonism takes its name from
       ancient sport and culture tournaments. Agon is also the name of the contest between
       opposing arguments in Greek tragedy.                  
         Western theatre has always been, above all, a medium for representing conflict
       and opposition: between good and evil, us and them, competing ideas and ideolo-
       gies, societies and nations, the powerless and the powerful, ideals and traditions,
       generations, families, couples – and even the inner struggles within an individual’s
       psyche.The conflicts that are carried out in the theatre are representative, sometimes
       physical, sometimes psychological, sometimes discursive. Theatre can be a place of
       negotiation, of redefining major narratives, of going beyond the ‘violent and othering
       dimensions of dominant imaginaries’ (Death in this issue).
         But while we must argue, convince, win and lose in some struggles, there are oth-
       ers where no meaningful deliberation can happen anymore. The science is clear, the
       climate catastrophe is real, we don’t need to imagine it, we know the consequences.
       But what does that mean for us as individuals, for the groups, collectives, networks
       we are part of? Once again, we might need to direct our imagination not towards the
       future but towards the present.                       
         ‘Training for the Future; is a series of assemblies that the Dutch artist Jonas Staal
       and I started in 2018 as an attempt at offering provisional and performative training
       sequences for ‘something’ yet to come. The trainings attempt to ‘reclaim the future
       as a site of collective struggle’ by learning, training, exchanging tactics and strategies
       to appropriate the means of production of the future. The notion of training – with its
       military or at least sport related overtone – is not unproblematic since it might sug-
       gest a particular hierarchy of knowledge and ability: the trainer proposing methods,
       the others following her/his lead. But more importantly it implies a physical experi-
       ence – the body becomes part of the imagination, the body itself imagines. Joining
       those trainings – which are held by artists and activists from all over the world –
       means accepting this temporary division of roles and power, and following instruc-
       tions, even if one does not entirely agree with the particular practice proposed. It is to
       take the form of embodied practice first, and verbal reflection second.
         The pandemic reminded even the physically more abled amongst us of the specific
       precarity of our bodies. The necessity of both distance and proximity became a com-
       mon, paradoxical struggle which was reflected in two complementary trainings: one
       led by the LGBTQIA+ activists The House of Tupamaras in Bogotá, the other one by
       the Swiss-based art/care project The Army of Love. While the former explored ideas
       of the penetrable and the impenetrable in close physical contact, the latter negotiated
       how love and touch can be offered in times of the pandemic without the risk of infec-
       tion. In a later edition, the Italian collective Al.Di.Qua (Alternative Disability Quality
       Artists) dismantled the myth of the able and capable body by placing the trainees in
       situations in which sociological mechanisms of separation were overcome in the here
       and now. Ren Loren Britton & Isabel Paehr of the art and research group MELT made
       concepts such as ‘trans* time, crip time and kinship time’ tangible by synchronizing

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 20 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       in different exercises the participants bodies and minds with the help of loops, palin-
       dromes and radical slowness, subverting temporal norms. In parallel, the indigenous
       US artists Kite and Robbie Wing guided participants in listening to the knowable and
       the unknowable with and through non-humans in the physical world and non-humans
       in the invisible world.                               
         All these trainings have a strong affective dimension. We train – or “preenact” to
       use the term proposed by Public Movement and Oliver Marchart – for an unimagi-
       nable future by imagining a different present instead; a different present that is prag-
       matic and utopian, physically and intellectually. The physical component not only
       lies in the bodily experience, in the training of movements, in the positions in space,
       but in the co-presence of all participants: we all share responsibility for what is hap-
       pening here and now, we are experiencing it together, a temporary collective that we
       might not even have chosen for ourselves. Negotiating how to live and work together
       demands compromises in every step without letting the common goals get out of
       sight.                                                
         This might also be the reason for the tremendous success of the collective queer
       feminist performances by Austrian choreographer Florentina Holzinger: works that
       are presented exclusively by a cast read as female, who usually perform more or
       less naked, playing with very explicit images and quite some radical action. But the
       scandal her work often provokes is not what is interesting about it. Every supposed
       provocation (and there are many of these in her performances – from nudity and
       sexuality to self-injuring and intimate confessions) is a drumbeat, even an invitation
       to proclaim a collective. Works like Holzinger’s Ophelia got Talent or SANCTA cre-
       ate a feeling of witnessing a community live and work; joyful, upbeat, and optimistic
       because they indeed are about the future. They are about imagining the world that
       one wants, and not about working on what one doesn’t want. So, perhaps what makes
       Holzinger’s work so compelling is the fact that she achieves what neither official
       politics nor activism nor art manage to pull off: not just showing a utopia, but also
       creating a truth, simply by saying, playing, living it. By, to use the Butlerian termi-
       nology: being performative. This performativity is rooted in mutual trust, for which
       duration plays a crucial role: The collective on stage has collaborated for a long time,
       exceeding by far the couple of days available for our “Training for the Future”. The
       audience gets during the two- three hours of the performance a glance of something
       that had time to grow over the course of several productions and years.
         Resonating the late novelist Ursula Le Guin, the forms of imagination cultivated
       through these theatre productions are not about ‘that wonderful, big, long, hard thing’
       (Le Guin, 2019 [1986], 29). They are ‘not [about] that story. We’ve heard it, we’ve all
       heard all about all the sticks and spears and swords, the things to bash and poke and
       hit with, the long, hard things, but we have not heard about the thing to put things in,
       the container for the thing contained. That is a new story’ (Le Guin 2019 [1986], 29).
         As with novels for Le Guin, theatre is a “carrier bag” of different kinds of stories.
       It is an invitation – but one that is not unconditional, not “unaggressive or uncomba-
       tive” – but the point is, as Le Guin puts it, ‘I don’t […] consider myself heroic’ for
       fighting. “It’s just one of the damn things you have to do in order to go on gathering
       wild oats and telling stories.” (Le Guin, 2019 [1986], 33). There is not necessarily
       a contradiction between this approach and the idea of agonism, it just takes a differ-

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 21 of 28 31
                                                             
       ent form: ‘One relationship among elements […] may well be that of conflict, but
       the reduction of narrative to conflict is absurd’ (Le Guin, 2019 [1986], 34-35). After
       all, theatre is not only the site of conflict but also a medium of human relations and
       interactions. A ‘thing to put things in’ (Le Guin, 2019 [1986], 29).
         The ‘carrier bag’ stands for a utopian desire for a different world, inspired by a
       way of looking at it that has not been lost but underestimated. And at the same time
       the carrier bag stands for deep pragmatism – it is “a thing to put things in” (Le Guin,
       2019 [1986], 29). A practical solution to make survival easier (to collect food, to hold
       the baby on the body…). In this line the carrier bag of theatre contains stories of con-
       flict as well as stories of healing. It envelopes physical and intellectual experiences at
       once as we are part of the bag and outside. It is pragmatic and utopian at once. Just a
       tool for imagination. But one with almost unlimited potential.
       Florian Malzacher                                     
                                                             
       After imagination                                     
                                                             
       This Critical Exchange picks up on a prevailing trend: In recent years we have seen a
       plethora of publications engaging with ‘the imaginary’ or ‘imagination’ from the per-
       spective of social, political or activist theory. While some authors tend to foreground
       the image-like quality of, say, the ‘imaginal’ (Bottici, 2019), in most cases these
       concepts are employed in much broader fashion. Imagination is predominantly seen
       as a mostly collective faculty that allows, or doesn’t allow, for figuring out alterna-
       tive ideas of communal or societal relations, democracy, or, more dramatically, the
       future of humanity. The much diagnosed ‘lack of imagination’ is to be remedied, it
       is claimed, by a political, social, or artistic effort at invigorating our very faculty of
       imagination (see exemplarily Ezrahi, 2012; Haiven & Khasnabish, 2014; Gilman-
       Opalsky & Shukaitis 2019; Olufemi, 2021; Mulgan, 2022; Thaler, 2024).
         What the current wave of literature on this topic seems to promise, hence, is a
       way out of our current misery of living in a world without emancipatory alternatives.
       But does the promise hold? Perhaps not, or not yet. As it stands, the fashionable
       ‘turn to imagination’ (as indicated by Sachs Olsen and Machin above) could easily
       be accused of having turned imagination into a magical signifier, supposed to con-
       jure up, in the trivial sense of the term, an ‘imaginary’ solution to a real problem. In
       fact, one may ask whether the call for more and better (in the sense of more radical)
       imagination could be part of the problem, rather than the solution. The fad could very
       well be a symptom of the depressing experience that emancipatory politics, rather
       than emancipatory imagination, has encountered a dead-end. While Western societies
       have certainly become more liberal regarding the pursuit of individual preferences, it
       would be a long stretch to claim that collective freedom and substantive equality have
       increased, that solidarity is considered a value, or that popular sovereignty is more
       than a word in liberal constitutions. While liberal-democratic regimes have less and
       less incentives to hide their oligarchic character (Winters, 2011), an almost powerless
       Left has run out of political options – hence its flight into imagination.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 22 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
         My point is not, however, that the entire discussion about imagination should be
       left behind. To dismiss it would be ill-advised - and here I agree with Carl Death
       - since all politics involves imagination, yet in a very mundane sense of the lat-
       ter. Whoever opts for a particular line of action will do so by imagining a desired
       outcome supposed to transcend the status quo (see Marchart, 2023 on the intrinsic
       relation between political decision and imagination). All political actors are equipped
       with a faculty of imagination for otherwise they would never engage in any action
       other than the ritualistic repetition of the given. It’s more a matter of scale: we may
       imagine a traffic-calmed street in front of our doorstep, or we may imagine a world
       without capitalism, but in both cases political action, should it occur, will involve the
       faculty of imagination. It is obvious that the problem does not simply lie in our imagi-
       native capabilities, it lies elsewhere – which is why the ubiquitous mantra according
       to which, supposedly, it is easier to imagine the end of the world than it is to imagine
       the end of capitalism, could be off the mark. The main problem is not that we are
       lacking imagination and would merely be in need of some activist, philosophical or
       artistic gymnastics in order to stretch the bounds of the imaginable, as it is claimed in
       some of the literature. The main problem is that, in the given hegemonic conjuncture,
       we are lacking the political means to achieve any goals greater than a traffic-calmed
       street in the neighborhood.                           
         This, all too brief, reflection should elucidate where the real desideratum is to
       be found. What the debate lacks, to a large extent, is a realistic account of politics.
       The turn to imagination, which takes place in the wake of a newfound interest in the
       utopian (Levitas, 2013), is, at the same time, a turn away from a political realism that
       once used to be, next to its utopian currents, a trademark of the Left, at least in a par-
       ticular Marxist, Leninist or Gramscian tradition. The turn to imagination, thus, attests
       to a disbalance between utopianism and realism, which, in my view, is due to the
       sharply decreasing capacity of emancipatory forces to create consensus and deliber-
       ate consent – what Gramsci called hegemony – among the popular classes. It is in this
       context of the, partially self-inflicted, insignificance of the Left as a political force
       that the turn to the utopian and the imaginary can be read as an escape from a depress-
       ing and debilitating political reality, a defense reaction against the painful realization
       that emancipatory forces have been checkmated in the game of power politics.
         If this hypothesis holds, it would also explain why, together with the turn to imagi-
       nation and a new-found interest in the utopian, the anarchist strategy of ‘prefigura-
       tion’ (of ‘creating a new world in the shell of the old’) has gained prominence in
       recent years (Monticelli, 2022; Van de Sande, 2024). Holding the same promise,
       prefiguration too might turn out a defense-reaction, as it all-to-often comes down to
       experimentally imagining alternatives within the confines of like-minded groups that
       have withdrawn to what Hakim Bey once called ‘temporary autonomous zones’ (Bey,
       2003). In the francophone world a version of this term has come to prominence in
       recent years among activists erecting so-called ZADs (Zones à défendre). While some
       of them might have achieved practical goals locally (such as preventing the build-
       ing of a local airport), the very name of a ‘Zone to be defended’ already indicates
       the mostly defensive character of prefigurative communal experiments of this kind.
       Sometimes activists do manage to create alliances with neighbors, but where prefigu-
       rative communities escape into political or cultural self-referentiality, the laudable

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 23 of 28 31
                                                             
       effort to imaginatively prefigure free and equal communal relationships comes at the
       cost of self-enclosure, if not self-ghettoization, of, in other words, locking out the less
       than free and equal rest of the world.                
         Now, the current discussions around the question of imagination would be signifi-
       cantly advanced if a realistic view on politics was adopted, both on an analytical and
       a practical level. Analytically, to solemnly invoke the magic powers of the human
       faculty of imagination cannot substitute a sober analysis of the political conjuncture
       and the means at one’s disposal, i.e., of what Machiavelli called the verità effettuale
       della cosa, which implies that one has to be on guard against wishful thinking and
       an empty rhetorics sometimes bordering on political kitsch. Practically, strategies of
       imaginative prefiguration, be they utopian in character or not, need to be reconnected
       to a realistic idea of politics. In the anarchist trait, the intrinsic attractiveness of living
       in an autonomous ‘zone’ is simply taken for granted. It is assumed that people would
       be so immensely fascinated by an anarchist utopia that they will be more than happy
       to emulate it. In reality, leftists regularly tend to overrate the attractiveness of their
       own life-world which, in fact, holds little appeal to the popular classes that would,
       when given the choice, prefer not to live in an anarchist ‘Zone to be defended’. To
       avoid any such misplaced anarchist optimism of the intellect (or of the faculty of
       imagination), a countervailing optimism of the will needs to be cultivated, geared at
       actively increasing the appeal of a given hegemonic project, at creating consent and
       consensus among the popular classes. Imagination, in this political sense, would be
       neither a purely intellectual affair nor would it exhaust itself in communal experi-
       ments, it would be largely equivalent to expanding a hegemonic project. I would like
       to point out three dimensions of such a political conception of imagination from a
       Gramscian or what is sometimes called an ‘Essex School’ perspective.
         First, it might be helpful, for the sake of politicizing the conceptual apparatus, to
       resort to Ernesto Laclau’s rarely discussed notion of the ‘social imaginary’, defined
       as a, by and large, unsurpassable hegemonic horizon of intelligibility. Laclau (1990,
       63-68) gives the example of the role ‘reason’ played for Enlightenment discourse, but
       one could easily provide more contemporary examples, such as, for instance, ‘share-
       holder value’ as a horizon of intelligibility for neoliberal politics, or, prior to that, the
       ‘welfare state’ as a horizon of intelligibility for the neo-corporatist arrangement in
       most Western post-War nations. Laclau points out that every social imaginary has its
       roots in an originary political myth that came to be expanded into a social imaginary
       which then defines, to a significant degree, what counts as intelligible in a given con-
       juncture and what doesn’t. While Laclau does not discuss imagination as a concept,
       it seems to be consequential to understand by imagination the hegemonic process
       through which a given myth comes to be politically expanded into an imaginary
       horizon that will be taken for granted, or at least not actively challenged, by large
       sectors of the populace. Accordingly, to ‘imagine’ any emancipatory alternative is not
       so much about the intellectual or experimental endeavor to give birth to a brilliant
       new idea or communal practice as it amounts to the hegemonic task of creating an
       imaginary that is likely to gain the consent of as many people as possible.
         Second, political practice must be designed in ways that allow for achieving
       this task. Consequently, the goal of political practice does not consist in ‘becom-
       ing minor’, as in Deleuze and Guattari, but it needs to be geared toward ‘becoming

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 24 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
                                                             
       major’, as in a Gramsci-inspired theory of politics. Putting one’s trust in the intrin-
       sic appeal of emancipatory political attitudes, and of a left-leaning life-world, will
       always be a recipe for sectarian self-minorization. From a hegemony perspective,
       politics must instead be envisaged as a strategic macro-political endeavor (rather
       than only a micro-political tactic) aimed at overcoming obstacles and with a clear
       political goal in view. It must also be envisaged as an organized practice, because,
       to use Gramscian language, a ‘collective will’, i.e., a hegemonic project, needs to be
       organized (which in Gramsci is the task of what he calls the ‘modern Prince’ or the
       ‘organic intellectual’, that is, a political organization which, for him, was the party).
       It, therefore, goes without saying that the subject of political articulation is an orga-
       nized collective – neither an individual nor a dispersed multitude. And, eventually,
       politics is a deeply conflictual affair that involves partisanship and will, by neces-
       sity, encounter political enemies. All these minimal criteria of politics (see Marchart,
       2018, 135-151), if they apply to politics at large, must also apply to a political prac-
       tice of imagination: the latter should be envisaged as expansive (majority-oriented),
       strategic, organized, collective and conflictual action.
         Third, given its conflictual nature, imagination is related, on the plane of a general
       political ontology, to the category of antagonism (Marchart, 2023, 44-46). Although
       this is not discussed in Paula Diehl’s reflection above, a harmonious social order, if
       it was ever possible, would not generate any political imaginary. Only because the
       very ground of society, from a post-foundational perspective, is nothing other than an
       abyss, only because society is at the same time constituted and torn apart by antago-
       nism (Laclau 1990; Marchart, 2019), new imaginations of social cohesion emerge
       from the gaps and fissures of the social world. A society identical with itself would
       never allow for imagining anything. Imagination, therefore, is inextricably linked
       to the very ontological condition of society, i.e., antagonism. There will always be
       imagination, not for the anthropological reason, as philosophers assume, that humans
       are equipped with a particular faculty of imagination, but because antagonism con-
       stantly creates and subverts imaginaries. Hence, to say society is to say imagination.
       And to say imagination is to say politics. It is as simple as that.
       Oliver Marchart                                       
       Acknowledgement This Critical Exchange is the outcome of the discussions at two workshops, the first
       funded by the Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Agder, Norway and the second funded by the
       School of Social Sciences and the Sustainable Consumption Institute, University of Manchester.
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
       NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution
       and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s)
       and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed
       material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article
       or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
       Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
       the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
       exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view
       a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 /.
                                                             

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 25 of 28 31
       References                                            
                                                             
       Arendt, H. (1958) The Human Condition. University of Chicago Press.
       Austin, J.L. (1962) How to do things with words. Clarendon Press.
       Barnett, C. (1998) Cultural twists and turns. Environment and Planning D: Society & Space 16: 631–634.
       Beardsworth, R. (2020) Climate science, the politics of climate change and futures of IR. International
         Relations 34(3): 374–390.                           
       Bey, H. (2003) T.A.Z.: The Temporary Autonomous Zone. Ontological Anarchy, Poetic Terrorism, New
         York: Autonomedia.                                  
       Boltanski, L. and Chiapello, E. (2003) The New Spirit of Capitalism. Verso.
       Bottici, C. (2011) From Imagination to the Imaginary and beyond: Towards a Theory of Imaginal Politics.
         In C. Bottici and B. Challand (eds.) The Politics of Imagination. Birkbeck Law Press, pp. 16–37.
       Bottici, C. (2019) Imaginal Politics: Images Beyond Imagination and the Imaginary. Columbia University
         Press.                                              
       Braidotti, R. (2021) Posthuman Feminism. Polity Press.
       Braun, B. (2015) Futures: Imagining socioecological transformation – an introduction. Annals of the Asso-
         ciation of American Geographers 105(2): 239–243.    
       Browne, C. and Diehl, P. (2019) Conceptualising the political imaginary: An introduction to the special
         issue. Social Epistemology 33(5): 393–397.          
       Buber, M. (1952) Good and Evil. Scribner.             
       Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. Routledge.
       Carr, E.H. (2001) The Twenty Years’ Crisis 1919–1939: An Introduction to the Study of International Rela-
         tions. Palgrave Macmillan.                          
       David Castle. (1998). “Hearts, Minds and Radical Democracy: Interview with Ernesto Laclau and Chantal
         Mouffe.” Red Pepper Media                           
       Castoriadis, C. (1987) The Imaginary Institution of Society. MIT Press.
       Castoriadis, Cornelius. (1991). Philosophy, Politics, Autonomy (ed. by David Ames Curtis). New York/
         Oxford: Oxford University Press                     
       Castoriadis, Cornelius. (1994). Radical imagination and the social instituting imaginary. In Rethinking
         Imagination. pp.136-154. Edited by Gillian Robinson and John Rundell. London and New York:
         Routledge                                           
       Ciofalo, N., Dudgeon, P. and Nikora, L.W. (2022) Indigenous community psychologies, decolonization,
         and radical imagination within ecologies of knowledges. American Journal of Community Psychol-
         ogy 69: 283–293.                                    
       Coates, O. (2025) Achille Mbembe. Routledge.          
       Coppenolle, V., Hermine, M.B. and Van De Graaf, T. (2023) Reframing the Climate Debate: The Origins
         and Diffusion of Net Zero Pledges. Global Policy 14(1): 48–60.
       Daniel, A. and Miller, J.P. (2024) Imagination, decolonization, and intersectionality: the #RhodesMustFall
         student occupations in Cape Town. South Africa. Social Movement Studies. 23(4): 495–516. h t t p s : / / d
         o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 4 7 4 2 8 3 7 . 2 0 2 2 . 2 0 7 9 1 2 0.
       Davoudi, S. and Brooks, E. (2021) City-Regional Imaginaries and Politics of Rescaling. Regional Studies
         55(1): 52–62. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 0 0 3 4 3 4 0 4 . 2 0 2 0 . 1 7 6 2 8 5 6.
       Death, C. (2022a) Africanfuturist socio-climatic imaginaries and Nnedi Okorafor’s wild Necropolitics.
         Antipode 54(1): 240–258.                            
       Death, C. (2022b) Climate fiction, climate theory: Decolonising imaginations of Global Futures. Millen-
         nium: Journal of International Studies 50(2): 430–455.
       Death, C. (2025) African Climate Futures. OUP.        
       Demos, T.J. (2023) Radical Futurisms. Sternberg press.
       Diehl, P. (2019) Temporality and the political imaginary in the dynamics of political representation, Social
         Epistemology. Social Epistemology 33(5): 410–421. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 0 2 6 9 1 7 2 8 . 2 0 1 9 . 1 6 5 2 8
         6 5.                                                
       Diehl, Paula. (2015). Das Symbolische das Imaginäre und die Demokratie Eine Theorie politischer
         Repräsentation. Baden-Baden: Nomos                  
       Diehl, Paula. (2024). Can we be democratic? Dealing with the Transformations of the Political Imaginary.
         In: Theodor Lalér and Mats Rosengren (Eds.), Can we be Democratic? Occasional Papers, 2024
         Vol 1, 35-56.                                       

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 26 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
       Dillet, B. and Hatzisavvidou, S. (2021) ‘Beyond technofix: Thinking with Epimetheus in the Anthropo-
         cene.’ Contemporary Political Theory 21(3): 351–372.
       Dixson-Declève, Sandrine and et al. (2024). ‘Open Letter on COP Reform. h t t p s : / / w w w . c l u b o f r o m e . o r g /
         co p - r e f o r m - 2 0 2 4 /                      
       Eckersley, R. (2021) Greening states and societies: From transitions to great transformations. Environmen-
         tal Politics 30(1–2): 245–265.                      
       Ezrahi, Y. (2012) Imagined Democracies. Necessary Political Fictions. Cambridge University Press.
       Feola, Giuseppe. (2019). ‘Degrowth and the Unmaking of Capitalism: Beyond ‘Decolonization of the
         Imaginary”‘, 21.                                    
       Frase, P. (2016) Four Futures: Life After Capitalism. Verso.
       Le Guin, Ursula K. (2019) [1986]. The Carrier Bag Theory of Fiction. London: Ignota.
       Haiven, M. (2014) Crisis of Imagination, Crises of Power: Captalism, Creativity and the Commons. Zed
         Books.                                              
       Haiven, M. and Khasnabish, A. (2014) The Radical Imagination. Zed Books.
       Hatzisavvidou, S. (2024) Envisioning ecopolitical futures: Reading climate fiction as political theory.
         Futures 163: 103456. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . f u t u r e s . 2 0 2 4 . 1 0 3 4 5 6.
       Hatzisavvidou, Sophia. (2025) Anthropocene Imaginaries and the Role of Climate Fiction. In A. Machin
         and M.L.J. Wissenburg (eds.) Handbook of Environmental Political Theory in the Anthropocene.
         Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.                           
       Hawkins, H. (2019) Geography’s creative (re)turn: Toward a critical framework. Progress in Human
         Geography 43(6): 963–984.                           
       Heeswijk, J., Maria, H. and Rakes, R. (eds.) (2021) Toward the not-yet: art as public practice. BAK, basis
         voor actuele kunst.                                 
       Heller, Á. (2016) From utopia to dystopia. A story of Historical Imagination. Graduate Faculty Philosophy
         Journal 37(2): 289–304.                             
       Jessop, B. (2012) Economic and ecological crises: Green new deals and no-growth economies. Develop-
         ment 55(1): 17–24.                                  
       Kearney, Richard. (1998) Poetics of Imagining Modern to Postmodern. New York: Fordham University
         Press.                                              
       Kershaw, Baz. (1994). ‘Framing the Audience for Theatre’ in The Authority of the Consumer, Nicholas
         Abercrombie, Russell Keat and Nigel Whiteley. New York: Routledge, 166 - 168
       Lefort, Claude. (1988) The Question of Democracy In Claude Lefort: Democracy and Political Theory
         9–20. Cambridge: Polity Press.                      
       Lennon, K. (2015) Imagination and the Imaginary. Routledge.
       Levitas, R. (2013) Utopia as Method. The Imaginary Reconstitution of Society.
       Machin, A. (2022) Climate democracy: Sceptical, rational and radical imaginaries. Wires Climate Change
         13(4): e774. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.774.       
       Machin, A. (2025) The European Green Deal and the democratic imagination. Journal of European Inte-
         gration 47(2): 155–171. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 0 7 0 3 6 3 3 7 . 2 0 2 5 . 2 4 5 5 6 8 6.
       Malzacher, Florian. (2019). Theatre as assembly. In A Live Gathering: Performance and politics in con-
         temporary Europe. Pp. 178-199. Edited by Ana Vujanovic and Livia Piazza. Berlin: b_books
       Mann, G. and Wainwright, J. (2018) Climate Leviathan. Verso.
       Marchart, O. (2010) Die politische Differenz. Suhrkamp.
       Marchart, O. (2018) Thinking Antagonism. Political Ontology after Laclau. Edinburgh University Press.
       Marchart, O. (2019) Conflictual Aesthetics. Sternberg Press.
       Marchart, O. (2024) Imagination und Entscheidung. Zur Kritik am aktuellen Boom an politischen Theo-
         rien der Einbildungskraft. Paragrana 32(2): 28–47.  
       Marchart, Oliver. (2023). Imagining Populism Differently. Notes on the Proposal of a Feminist, Interna-
         tionalist, Republican Populism. Ethics & Politics. XXV (2): 233-247 ISSN: 1825-5167
       Mbembe, A. (2021) Out of the dark night: Essays on decolonization. Columbia University Press.
       Mbembe, Achille and Felwine Sarr. (2023). ‘Preface’, in Achille Mbembe and Felwine Sarr (Eds) The
         Politics of Time: Imagining African Becomings, translated by Philip Gerard (Cambridge: Polity),
         pp. viii-xi                                         
       Mbembe, Achille (2001) On the Postcolony (Berkeley; University of California Press)
       Mbembe, Achille (2017) Critique of Black Reason, Translated by Laurent Dubois (Durham; Duke Uni-
         versity Press)                                      
       Mbembe, Achille (2019) Necropolitics, Translated by Steven Corcoran (Durham; Duke University Press)

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The turn to the imagination: transformation, politics and limits Page 27 of 28 31
       Milkoreit, M. (2017) Imaginary politics: Climate change and making the future. Elementa: Science of the
         Anthropocene 5: 62. https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.249.
       Mitchell, A. and Chaudhury, A. (2020) Worlding beyond “the” “End” of “the World”: White apocalyptic
         visions and BIPOC futurisms. International Relations 34(3): 309–332.
       Monticelli, L. (ed.) (2022) The Future is Now. Bristol University Press.
       Mulgan, G. (2022) Another World Is Possible: How to Reignite Social and Political Imagination. Hurst
         publisher.                                          
       Niang, A. (2016) The imperative of African perspectives on International Relations (IR). Politics 36(4):
         453–466.                                            
       Norgaard, K.M. (2018) The sociological imagination in a time of climate change. Global and Planetary
         Change 163: 171–176. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . g l o p l a c h a . 2 0 1 7 . 0 9 . 0 1 8.
       Olufemi, L. (2021) Experiments in Imagining Otherwise. Hajar Press.
       Oreskes, N. and Conway, E.M. (2014) The collapse of western civilisation: A view from the future. Colum-
         bia University Press.                               
       Rai, S.M., Gluhovic, M., Jestrovic, S. and Saward, M. (eds.) (2021) The Oxford Handbook on Politics and
         Performance. Oxford University Press.               
       Robinson, K.S. (2020) Ministry of the Future. Orbit.  
       Sachs Olsen, C. (2019) Urban space and the politics of socially engaged art. Progress in Human Geogra-
         phy 43(6): 985–1000.                                
       Sachs Olsen, C. (2021) Curating change: Spatial utopian politics and the architecture of degrowth. Trans-
         actions of the Institute of British Geographers 46: 704–716.
       Sultana, Farhana. (2022) The Unbearable Heaviness of Climate Coloniality. Political Geography. h t t p s : / /
         d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . p o l g e o . 2 0 2 2 . 1 0 2 6 3 8 .
       Thaler, M. (2024) Eco-Miserabilism and Radical Hope: On the Utopian Vision of Post-Apocalyptic Envi-
         ronmentalism. American Political Science Review 118(1): 318–331.
       Tozer, L. and Klenk, N. (2018) Discourses of carbon neutrality and imaginaries of urban futures. Energy
         Research & Social Science. 35: 174–181.             
       Van de Sande, M. (2024) Prefigurative Democracy: Protest. Edinburgh University Press.
       Wapner, P. and Elver, H. (2016) Reimagining Climate Change. Routledge.
       Whyte, K. (2017) Indigenous Climate Change Studies: Indigenizing Futures. Decolonizing the Anthropo-
         cene. English Language Notes. 55(1–2): 153–162.     
       Winters, J.A. (2011) Oligarchy. Cambridge University Press.
       Yusoff, K. and Gabrys, J. (2011) Climate change and the imagination. Wires Climate Change. 2: 516–534.
       Zografos, C. and Robbins, P. (2020) Green sacrifice zones, or why a Green New Deal cannot ignore the
         cost shifts of just transitions. One Earth 3(5): 543–546. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.10.012.
       Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Authors and Affiliations                              
       Amanda Machin1 · Cecilie Sachs Olsen2 · Carl Death3 · Paula Diehl4 ·
       Sophia Hatzisavvidou5 · Oliver Marchart6 · Florian Malzacher7
         Amanda Machin                                       
         amanda.machin@uia.no                                
         Cecilie Sachs Olsen                                 
         cecilies@oslomet.no                                 
         Carl Death                                          
         carl.death@manchester.ac.uk                         
         Paula Diehl                                         
         diehl@politik.uni-kiel.de                           

[PAGE 28]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        31 Page 28 of 28                       A. Machin et al.
         Sophia Hatzisavvidou                                
         s.hatzisavvidou@bath.ac.uk                          
         Oliver Marchart                                     
         oliver.marchart@univie.ac.at                        
         Florian Malzacher                                   
         fmalzacher@hfg-karlsruhe.de                         
       1 University of Agder, Kristiansand, Norway           
       2 Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway          
       3 University of Manchester, Manchester, UK            
       4 University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany                   
       5 University of Bath, Bath, UK                        
                                                             
       6 University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria               
       7 Karlsruhe University of Arts and Design, Karlsruhe,, Germany
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             