[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:490–516       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00769-6            
       CRITICAL EXCHANGE                                     
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar                     
                                                             
       Rebecca Buxton1 · Samuel Bagg2 · David Enoch3 · Shal Marriott4 ·
       Samuel Moyn5                                          
                                                             
       Published online: 23 July 2025                        
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Keywords Judith Shkla · Realism · Fear · Liberalism   
                                                             
                                                             
       In my conversations with students, I often end up asking if they have heard of Judith
       Shklar. Almost none of them have; she is rarely taught in undergraduate philosophy or
       politics departments, but she becomes known to many of us once we are a little older
       and wiser. My own PhD supervisor recommended that I read Shklar in the first weeks
       of my doctorate, and she has continued to shape and challenge my work ever since.
         Of course, Shklar has not been “ignored” or “forgotten,” but she has remained a
       niche interest. Most know her for her famous essay “The Liberalism of Fear” (1989)
       in which she argues in favor of a liberalism centered around a summum malum,
       rather than a positive doctrine of justice or civic virtue. She is certainly not as well-
       celebrated as the other great political theorists and philosophers of her time such as
       Isaiah Berlin, John Rawls, and Michael Walzer, all of whom she considered friends.
       Only a handful of books are dedicated to engaging fully with her thought (Gatta,
       2018; Hall, 2025; Hess, 2014), although many take inspiration from it (Bagg,
       *                                                     
         Rebecca Buxton                                      
         rebecca.buxton@bristol.ac.uk                        
         Samuel Bagg                                         
         samuel.bagg@gmail.com                               
         David Enoch                                         
         david.enoch@law.ox.ac.uk                            
         Shal Marriott                                       
         shal.marriott@mail.mcgill.ca                        
         Samuel Moyn                                         
         samuel.moyn@yale.edu                                
       1 University of Bristol, Bristol BS81TH, UK           
       2 University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA
       3 University of Oxford, Balliol College, Oxford OX13BJ, UK
       4 McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 0G4, Canada 
       5 Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA           
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            491      
                                                             
       2024; Levy, 2000). Stanley Hoffman speculated that this lack of engagement may
       be because Shklar was more of a “fox” than a “hedgehog,” to use Berlin’s termi-
       nology; she was averse to world-building, skeptical of grand narratives, and sought
       mainly to protect the weak from the powerful. Perhaps because of this, much work
       on Shklar has been undertaken by her old colleagues, her students, and a patchwork
       of admirers.                                          
         In the last decade this has begun to shift, with Shklar’s political thought picking
       up some much-needed momentum. Recent work has focused on what people take to
       be her distinctively “negative” Shklarian method (Forrester, 2012; Luo, 2021); that
       she wanted us to “begin with what is to be avoided” (1985, p. 5). This thread runs
       through much of Shklar’s writing, from Legalism (1964) to her final Tanner Lectures
       on American Citizenship (1991a). Other work extends Shklar’s most famous essay
       (Douglass, 2023; Hall, 2022), or interprets the many lectures and notes that she left
       behind (Pickford, 2024; Scheuerman, 2021). Some focus on a Shklarian approach to
       cruelty and injustice (Fives, 2020; Royer, 2022; Stullerova, 2014).
         This critical exchange continues this growing engagement with Shklar, ranging
       from discussions of how we might emotionally respond to her work, to provocations
       on how her negativism might ground a more radical politics. Each of the contribu-
       tions offers a new way of thinking about Shklar and what she might offer us today.
         Samuel Bagg’s contribution asks whether Shklar’s trademark negativism might
       be adopted to underpin a more radical politics. Although sometimes criticized for
       her conservativism, Bagg argues that a healthy dose of Shklarian negativism may be
       central to demanding something more from our politics. David Enoch’s contribution
       reflects on Shklar’s lack of uptake in analytical political philosophy. Considering his
       own engagement with Shklar’s work, Enoch discusses how she might influence our
       thinking in more abstract approaches to political thought, and how political philos-
       ophers should engage with political history. Shal Marriott’s contribution turns our
       attention to how Shklar draws out emotions in her readers. Marriott argues that emo-
       tions play a central role in politics for Shklar and that they, therefore, must also be
       foregrounded in how we interpret her thought. The final contribution, from Samuel
       Moyn, asks us to consider Shklar’s relationship with a political thinker that she, per-
       haps surprisingly, very rarely discussed: John Stuart Mill.
         Above all, these interventions continue to push us to think with Shklar in new
       ways. In doing so, they contribute to the growing and necessary reflection on the
       work that Shklar left behind.                         
         Rebecca Buxton                                      
       A Radicalism of Fear? The Affordances of Negative Idealism in Judith
       Shklar and Beyond                                     
       Negativity is often assumed to stand in stark tension with radical political demands.
       Fear, after all, is a distinctly conservative emotion (Robin, 2004)—steering us away
       from potentially liberatory experiments, out of concern for the unpredictable forces
       they may unleash (Hirschman, 1991). At best, it limits our ambitions to incremen-
       tal progress; at worst, it activates our basest reactionary instincts. Therefore, many
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       492                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       presume that a properly radical orientation—indeed, even an ordinary progressive
       one—must be grounded in hope rather than fear.        
         More broadly, it is thought, a properly ambitious ideal should foreground positive
       goals we can strive for, rather than negative outcomes to avoid. For some critics of
       negative idealism, the necessity of prioritizing positive ideals is simply a matter of
       philosophical logic—we cannot know what is bad unless we first know what is good
       (Stemplowska, 2008, p. 332)—while for others, the key concerns are pragmatic and
       political (Simmons, 2010, p. 35). For their part, meanwhile, many “realists” and
       “moderates” are willing to cede the realm of abstract principles and utopian specula-
       tion to radical opponents (Galston, 2010; Sleat, 2013).
         A series of interrelated dichotomies thus structures much discourse about the
       role and purpose of political theorizing: hope vs. fear; utopianism vs. realism; ideal-
       ism vs. feasibility; ambition vs. moderation; optimism vs. skepticism; full justice
       vs. basic legitimacy—all of which line up, roughly, with the opposition between
       “radicalism” and “liberalism.” And for many whose sympathies lie clearly on either
       side of this divide, nothing illustrates its salience better than Shklar’s “liberalism
       of fear”: whereas liberal realists embrace her sober skepticism toward utopian aspi-
       rations (Williams, 2005), radicals see it as proof that liberalism is fundamentally
       unambitious, fearful, and conservative at heart (Robin, 2004).
         There is no shortage of attempts to unsettle these dichotomies in terms of their
       general validity as well as their embodiment by Shklar in particular. Defenders of
       negative idealism have sought to undermine the supposed logical priority of positive
       ideals (Barrett, 2020), for instance, while radically inclined realists have assailed
       the stultifying effects of “ideal theory” (Mills, 2005), and insisted on the utopian
       potential of a “realist” approach, properly conceived (Bagg, 2022; Raekstad, 2018).
       Recently, Shklar scholarship itself has tended to highlight the radical potential
       implicit in her work—by recovering her ambivalence toward key concepts such as
       “hope” (Forrester, 2011), or counterposing the liberalism of fear with earlier work
       more amenable to radical imaginaries (Moyn, 2020) or drawing out certain unarticu-
       lated themes—such as a focus on empowering the “voiceless”—running throughout
       her rich but unsystematic oeuvre (Gatta, 2018).       
         This contribution picks up one line of argument left unfinished by the other ones.
       I argue that Shklar’s “liberalism of fear” not only eludes the common dichotomies it
       is often taken to affirm; it gives us resources for overturning them. Far from being
       incompatible with radical demands, a healthy dose of Shklarian fear and skepticism
       could—indeed, should—lead us to embrace many of those demands. That said, my
       aim here is not to offer a novel or especially comprehensive reading of Shklar, and
       my arguments do not turn on whether she herself (would have) embraced such goals.
       My first aim is to highlight the general affordances embedded within a liberalism of
       fear and, more generally, to vindicate negative idealism as a promising path forward
       in political theory.                                  
         In doing so, moreover, my second aim is to sketch a distinctive substantive
       account of radical politics in particular; one that both follows from and depends
       upon certain liberal commitments. As I develop it this Shklar-inspired “radicalism of
       fear” urges liberals to recognize their core commitments as inextricably linked, both
       theoretically and practically, with various demands normally seen as radical—i.e. as

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            493      
                                                             
       either opposed or supererogatory to more “basic” liberal commitments. In highlight-
       ing the common foundations and political interdependence of core liberal and radi-
       cal demands, it also urges those who embrace the latter to rethink their relationship
       to the former. Some versions of liberalism have served to obfuscate domination and
       preclude the radical means required to mitigate it. Yet the “liberalism of fear” does
       neither—and in fact, I conclude, internalizing its lessons is crucial to the success of
       radical goals.                                        
         In what sense is the liberalism of fear a form of negative idealism? Perhaps most
       famously, Shklar notes, it “begins”; with a highest bad (summum malum)—identi-
       fied as cruelty—rather than a highest good (summum bonum), such as justice or vir-
       tue (Shklar, 1989, p. 29). In my view, though, this starting point is not the key dis-
       tinctive feature of her outlook, or of negative idealism more generally. What makes
       an ideal usefully “negative,” rather, is that it gains traction on the world primarily
       through its articulation of the specific outcomes it seeks to avoid, rather than those it
       aims to achieve. And beyond the abstract invocation to avoid cruelty as such, Shklar
       enumerates quite a few such bad outcomes.             
         Confining ourselves only to the classic “liberalism of fear” essay, her litany
       includes war, religious indoctrination, forced conversions, an erasure of the private
       sphere, permanent social classes, torture, systemic fear of physical and emotional
       pain, and both public and private intimidation, as well as open-ended categories of
       “social oppression” (p. 21) and “oppressive practices” (p. 28). Most of her focus is
       on the “unrestrained ‘punishing’ and denials of the most basic means of survival
       by governments” (p. 37), but she also recognizes the fear and cruelty that would
       be generated by “private criminals” (p. 31) without lawful government. As such,
       what is to be avoided is not efficacious public power as such, but “abuses of power”
       (p. 28); “arbitrary, unexpected, unnecessary, and unlicensed acts of force” (p. 29);
       “extralegal, secret, and unauthorized acts by public agents” (p. 30).
         As concrete illustrations of the horrors that liberalism must be oriented against,
       she mentions extreme cases like the religious wars of the seventeenth century; the
       regimes of Mao, Hitler, and Stalin; and the Indian caste system. However, she also
       emphasizes that one can find plenty of examples in the “annual reports of Amnesty
       International and of contemporary warfare” or the “foreign news” in the New York
       Times, as well as its “accounts of the prevalence of racism, xenophobia, and system-
       atic governmental brutality” within the United States (pp. 37-38). At every opportu-
       nity, moreover, she rejects any suggestion that a liberalism of fear is concerned only
       with avoiding the most egregious cases of tyranny; insisting that it “regards abuses
       of power in all regimes with equal trepidation” (p. 28) and recognizes diverse forms
       of social oppression (p. 21). The cases she mentions are illustrative, not exhaustive,
       and the scattered list of concrete evils is deliberately provisional and open-ended.
         In an important sense, Shklar’s negative idealism is reactive and backward-look-
       ing. The decision theory it implies accords greater weight to the negative value of
       these horrors, than to the positive value of any purely hypothetical utopias—or, for
       that matter, to the negative value of any purely hypothetical dystopias, such as an AI-
       takeover and other “existential risks” whose avoidance is said to matter more than
       the needs of humans alive today. Given that history keeps going, however—provid-
       ing a steady stream of new developments to react to—“backward-looking” does not

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       494                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       imply “fixed” or “rigid.” On the contrary, its reactive stance is precisely what makes
       it inherently dynamic, giving it a mandate to constantly adapt as new horrors arise—
       for instance, by redrawing the line between private and public spheres (p. 24).
         Underlying these methodological guidelines, in Shklar’s view, is a fundamen-
       tal commitment to “intellectual modesty” (p. 26). Cruelty is her starting place not
       because of its logical or normative priority but because of its relative epistemic
       solidity in the face of profound uncertainty and disagreement (p. 30). Where Kan-
       tians and utilitarians will disagree strongly about our ultimate goals, and even about
       the ultimate reasons why caste societies and totalitarian regimes should be avoided,
       they can at least agree on the practical conclusion that such horrors—whose com-
       mon denominator is plausibly understood as “cruelty” should be avoided. She
       begins, in other words, not from what is logically or normatively foundational, but
       from what is epistemically most secure.               
         Of course, historical experience is Shklar’s guide not only to which outcomes are
       most essential to avoid, but also which structures of power are most likely to pro-
       duce them—and, conversely, which practices can help us avoid them. Fundamen-
       tally, Shklar observes that the basic units of political life are the weak and the pow-
       erful (p. 27)—and that those with the power to do so will act lawlessly and brutally
       unless prevented by sufficiently strong opposing forces (p. 28). And as it turns out,
       the key feature of many traditionally liberal institutions and practices is that they
       help to protect the weak from such predations—preventing those with power from
       using it arbitrarily, in their own narrow interests, at the expense of others.
         Perhaps most obviously, that is the true function of the rule of law and a variety
       of enumerated rights that directly limit the scope of government power; as well as
       practices such as federalism and the separation of powers that structurally divide
       political power among multiple competing centers. In turn, she asserts, historical
       experience also teaches that sustaining these direct constraints is impossible with-
       out the institutions of representative democracy, an “accessible, fair, and independ-
       ent judiciary open to appeals,” and “a multiplicity of politically active groups” as
       reflected in a flourishing civil society (p. 37). Finally, and most importantly for our
       purposes, she argues that these formal structures must be supported by a “disper-
       sion of power” among politically relevant groups, as well as “the elimination of such
       forms and degrees of social inequality as expose people to oppressive practices” (p.
       28).                                                  
         Although left undertheorized by Shklar herself, there are two critical insights
       here. The first is that formal rules on their own cannot protect the weak from the
       abuses of the powerful; in addition, there must also be well-organized social forces
       who enforce those rules. The weak must not be so weak that they cannot wield their
       power collectively to protect themselves, nor the powerful so strong that they can
       reliably overcome such efforts. The second is that inequalities of public power are
       not the only power disparities that generate opportunities for politically salient cru-
       elty and oppression.                                  
         It is taking these insights seriously, I argue, that gives rise to a “radicalism of
       fear,” if a relatively egalitarian distribution of private power is necessary to prevent
       the sort of cruelty, intimidation, and abuse of power that is liberalism’s true rai-
       son d’être, it follows that both public and private actors hoping to advance liberal

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            495      
                                                             
       ends should act aggressively to equalize it whenever it is sufficiently skewed—or in
       danger of becoming so. One cannot take this to mean the end of all “legally guaran-
       teed proprietorship,” which is “an indispensable… way of limiting the long arm of
       government and of dividing social power,” but at the same time, Shklar is clear that
       the right of property “cannot be unlimited”—precisely “because it serves a public
       purpose—the dispersion of power” (p. 31). And short of eliminating private prop-
       erty altogether, there are many radical steps that could plausibly serve this public
       purpose—including steeply progressive taxation, and generous redistribution toward
       poorer and disadvantaged groups, along with targeted policies designed to under-
       mine power monopolies, and political tactics that foster the collective power of rela-
       tively disempowered groups vis-a-vis their hegemonic opponents.
         Of course, such a “radicalism of fear” is hardly the only possible conclusion we
       might draw from Shklarian premises, and it is never openly embraced by Shklar.
       A great deal still hinges on what degree of skew warrants corrective action. Rea-
       sonable people will disagree about how dispersed social power must be—and how
       much social inequality can be allowed to remain—in order to ensure that the preda-
       tions of the powerful will be effectively opposed, and that the weak will no longer be
       exposed to oppressive practices. However desirable it may be to mitigate inequalities
       of private power in the abstract, skeptics may argue that our practically available
       mechanisms will always engender too much danger of cruelty and oppression in
       their own right, and are thus on balance indefensible—at least on Shklarian grounds.
       Mounting a comprehensive Shklarian defense of radical policy priorities and politi-
       cal tactics would require a great deal more in the way of argument—including
       empirical and historical evidence about the dangers of inequality at contemporary
       scales, as well as the potential for certain power-dispersing mechanisms to achieve
       their public purpose without violating other central commitments or becoming co-
       opted themselves.                                     
         As it happens, I have made such an argument at great length in a book called The
       Dispersion of Power, whose title pays homage to Shklar, but which otherwise fails to
       foreground her methodological influence (Bagg, 2024)—an omission I hope to rem-
       edy here.Rather than rehearsing the arguments developed there, my first aim in this
       contribution has simply been to highlight the plausibility of a Shklarian “radicalism
       of fear,” and in so doing to explore the often overlooked affordances of negative ide-
       alism more generally. Unlike other views associated with “cold war liberalism,” that
       is—including Isaiah Berlin’s “negative liberty,” perhaps the most prominent exam-
       ple of negative idealism in contemporary political theory—I have argued that the
       liberalism of fear does not entail a generalized skepticism toward radical aims. At
       least in conjunction with certain broadly plausible empirical assumptions, it gives us
       reasons to embrace many radically egalitarian demands for the aggressive redistri-
       bution of power.                                      
         My second aim—articulating a distinctive account of radical politics that is
       grounded on Shklarian premises—is complementary to the first. If a Shklarian per-
       spective gives liberals reason to be radicals, I argue that it also gives radicals reason
       to be liberals. In that sense, the radicalism of fear really is an extension or re-inter-
       pretation of the liberalism of fear, rather than an alternative to it. Of course, the radi-
       cal demands I have in mind would be incompatible with certain commitments that

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       496                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       are sometimes thought central to liberalism—especially in its “classical” forms—
       such as an absolute right to property, or a demand to minimize government “inter-
       ference” with the “natural” workings of a “free market” economy. But as we have
       seen, a liberalism of fear has little truck with such principles to begin with.
         Nor is the radicalism of fear committed to any vision of the self, or to a strict and
       unalterable boundary between public and private spheres, or to the use of particular
       sorts of reasons in justifying coercive power—or, for that matter, to any hard bound-
       ary between “coercion” and other forms of power. Generations of radicals have
       rightly demonstrated how each of these commitments, widely maintained by other
       accounts of liberalism, can obscure important forms of domination and oppression
       (Young, 1990). And while Shklar herself may not have discussed all of the faces of
       injustice that radicals seek to address, the open-ended structure of her view allows it
       to accommodate them—along with any others that become salient.
         What then does it mean to say that a Shklarian perspective gives radicals a reason
       to be liberals? For one, simply by articulating an account of liberal practices that is
       unburdened by such problematic commitments—absolutist interpretations of prop-
       erty, exclusionary visions of the self, and so on—it makes liberalism more attractive
       for those with radical aims. However, this pared-down version of liberalism does
       still constrain the range of acceptable goals and methods in ways that some radicals
       will find suspiciously moderate or even conservative. The liberalism of fear entails
       many familiar radical demands, I have argued—and is compatible with many oth-
       ers—but some, indeed, it marks as dangerous, if not entirely off-limits.
         The most obvious of these are methods that directly involve levels of cruelty and
       suffering beyond what is minimally necessary to sustain a legal order. And while
       few radicals today would openly endorse such methods, historical memory furnishes
       no shortage of ostensibly radical movements that had no such qualms. Meanwhile,
       this methodological constraint also entails a prohibition on the sort of goals that
       would require such methods for their achievement. Insofar as forced re-education
       and “self-criticism” sessions really are necessary for the comprehensive extirpation
       of “bourgeois subjectivity,” for instance—as many practitioners of torture have sin-
       cerely believed—then this goal itself must remain off-limits.
         Of course, our scrutiny cannot be reserved only for practices that directly involve
       cruelty. On Shklar’s account, indeed, the aim of most liberal practices is not to pro-
       hibit specific forms of cruelty, but to prevent anyone from acquiring the sort of
       unchecked power over others—in public or in private—that would enable them to
       perpetrate it. This includes the broad imperatives to disperse social power and limit
       the extent of inequality, which in turn give rise to the possibility of a radicalism of
       fear. Yet these very same considerations also urge caution about many of the meth-
       ods that radicals might be tempted to adopt in pursuit of their egalitarian demands,
       as well as certain ways of spelling out those demands in the first place.
         Insofar as such methods empower state officials to intervene in the private
       lives of individuals, they are exceptionally dangerous. No matter how effective
       such practices might be, in the right hands, at mitigating certain asymmetries of
       power—by reforming patriarchal gender relations, say—the harm they could do
       in the wrong hands is simply too great. While many state policies will indirectly
       affect the habits and character of citizens, as a byproduct of achieving other goals,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            497      
                                                             
       Shklar rightly insists that we should regard any state project aimed directly and
       intentionally at achieving such transformations with the greatest suspicion.
         More broadly, a radicalism of fear must also observe two key limits on the role
       of centralized state authorities in structuring economic life. While compatible
       with a serious reimagination of property relations and significant public owner-
       ship in certain industries, for one, a polity guided by a radicalism of fear cannot
       eliminate decentralized proprietary control altogether, or circumscribe it to such
       a degree that it no longer presents genuine obstacles to state projects. As Shklar
       notes, absolutist accounts of property undermine the genuine public purpose
       served by secure property rights—the dispersion of power—by enabling limit-
       less accumulation of wealth. At the opposite extreme, however, it is also possible
       to undermine this goal by overly constraining or eliminating the ability of non-
       state actors to accumulate and dispose of property as they wish. In short, propri-
       etary control cannot serve as an effective firewall against arbitrary forms of state
       power unless it provides individuals—as well as collective agents such as firms,
       universities, churches—with enough discretionary power to serve as meaningful
       sources of oppositional organization.                 
         Second, a radicalism of fear must also be wary of any policy that concentrates
       great discretionary power in the hands of state officials, without first ensuring that
       well-developed practices of accountability will reliably constrain those officials to
       the pursuit of certain well-defined public purposes. Here again, we cannot make
       categorical decrees about precisely how much concentration of power is too much,
       or what forms of accountability would be sufficient. As with the proper boundary
       between private and public, these are contextual judgments that will rightly vary
       under different conditions. Nevertheless, a radicalism of fear is constrained in its
       pursuit of radically egalitarian goals, in ways that other radicalisms are not, by its
       careful attention to such considerations. In particular, it rejects the wishful think-
       ing required to believe that state power would cease to be dangerous altogether if it
       could only be subjected to the right sort of “collective” control. It thus resists any
       understanding of radical egalitarian goals in terms of the complete “socialization” of
       the means of production.                              
         Why should anyone with radical inclinations accept these constraints? Do they
       not simply validate the radical’s foremost objection to liberalism—i.e. that it is a
       fundamentally conservative doctrine, which serves only to slow or prevent neces-
       sary radical change? My contention is that however true this may be of other ways
       of articulating liberal values, it is not true of this one. In part, admittedly, the plausi-
       bility of this claim depends on just how tightly the scope of radical action is circum-
       scribed in any given circumstances. As I have suggested, my own judgment is that
       a radicalism of fear is compatible with radically transformative levels of redistribu-
       tion, as well as aggressive state action to constrain the most powerful actors and fos-
       ter organization among counter-hegemonic groups. However, this is only because I
       believe these priorities can be pursued using tools that are sufficiently insulated from
       capture and co-optation—and should only be pursued when such tools are available.
       Others will find plausible reasons to reach a different judgment, and thus different
       conclusions about whether a Shklarian perspective entails intolerable limitations on
       the pursuit of radically egalitarian goals.           

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       498                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
         Ultimately, though, it does not matter how “intolerable” the constraints imposed
       by a radicalism of fear may appear to be. For unlike other liberal attempts to con-
       strain radical ambition, which come in the form of external impositions—as deonto-
       logical limitations, for instance, on what we are morally allowed to do in service of
       otherwise valuable ends—these should be understood as internal to radically egali-
       tarian demands themselves. They emerge organically from the pragmatic require-
       ments of pursuing and achieving such goals in a sustainable, non-self-undermining
       way. The reason that radicals should resist the temptation to achieve radically egali-
       tarian ends at the expense of the rule of law, proprietary control, judicial independ-
       ence, bureaucratic neutrality, and other key principles of the liberalism of fear, is
       not because they are somehow sacred, deserving categorical priority over more radi-
       cal demands. Rather, the reason is simply that violating these principles will render
       their radically egalitarian goals unattainable.       
         This temptation, of course, is understandable. Practices that separate, divide, and
       disperse political power make it more difficult to pursue collective egalitarian pro-
       jects that advance the interests of the weak at the expense of the powerful. Yet time
       and again, those taking this gamble have reaped only disappointment and ruin. As
       Shklar recognized, the advantages of the powerful, so obvious and galling within a
       liberal order defined by these constraints, would be even more pronounced in their
       absence, and so it is the weak who have the most to lose from their elimination.
       They are therefore central to the radicalism of fear—as they should be for any radi-
       calism worthy of the name.                            
         Samuel Bagg                                         
       Shklar, analytic philosophy, and dwelling on the sunny side
       of the street                                         
       I’ve been in philosophy for a while, and yet until recently I hadn’t read Shklar. As
       I recall, I was never assigned a reading by her (including in graduate seminars in
       political philosophy). I’m not even sure whether I had heard her name. Then, a few
       years ago, a highly hostile reader of a funding application for a project on liberalism
       said something like “If he’s going to write on these things, he should at least engage
       Shklar’s ‘Liberalism of Fear’.” For some reason, despite the obvious (and often jus-
       tified) tendency to just discard reports that are overly hostile, I decided to have a
       look. I was immediately struck by the depth of insights, by the often-witty writing,
       by the down-to-earth, keeping-the-eye-on-the-ball way of doing political philosophy
       (or political theory, as she would have insisted). Sure, Shklar doesn’t always live up
       to the rigorous argumentative standards I am more accustomed to from analytic phi-
       losophy, and there’s a lot to criticize (see Enoch, 2023),but still, her work on liberal-
       ism, it became immediately clear to me, was just great.
         So, I wondered – why hadn’t I been aware of her work earlier? It turned out
       that this is not too idiosyncratic. A quick search of Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
       losophy shows that, as I’m writing this, there are only seven entries mentioning
       Shklar (and only five referring to her work), and none in any detail. This is not
       just low compared to the most influential political philosophers (Rawls has 168,
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            499      
                                                             
       and an entire entry devoted to him), but also compared to many, many others.
       Eric Schwitzgebel (2024) has compiled a list of the most-cited philosophers in
       the Stanford Encyclopedia. This list includes only those who were cited at least
       30 times. At my request, Schwitzgebel was kind enough to run a couple of initial
       checks. The top 1000 would be 18-19 references, and Shklar would have been in a
       1122-person tie for number 4464.                      
         And yet Shklar is in no way neglected. She’s neglected, it seems, among phi-
       losophers, and perhaps especially among analytic philosophers. Analytic philoso-
       phy, though, is the only kind of philosophy I do. And yet I was enthusiastic about
       Shklar. This was puzzling.                            
         This contribution is my attempt to think through this puzzle – why is Shklar,
       despite her advantages (of which more below), not taken more seriously among
       political philosophers working in the analytic tradition? My answer will not be
       unified. A part of the explanatory work, I argue, is done by such boring factors as
       Shklar’s style which differs significantly from more standard analytic philosophy
       style, and similarly superficial facts. But part of the explanation runs deeper, and
       it is in terms of the failures of the dominant way of doing analytic political phi-
       losophy in the past half century or so. In this respect, political philosophy ought
       to pay more attention to the real world and its many shortcomings. It should
       become much more Shklarian.                           
         I want to emphasize, though, that this is not a text in the history of ideas.
       Rather, it is an attempt to learn something about analytic political philosophy
       from its attitude to Shklar (or lack thereof). So, I will – except in this paragraph
       – avoid discussions of the personal relations between Shklar and her Harvard phi-
       losophy department colleagues, even if they might do some relevant (historical)
       explanatory work. Bernard Yack (2017), for instance, discusses how important it
       was for Shklar to be thought of as a political theorist rather than a political phi-
       losopher. But this contribution is not about deciphering Shklar’s animosity (to the
       extent that’s what it was) toward philosophy, but rather philosophy’s disregard
       toward Shklar’s work. Of course, the two may be related. Also, despite Shklar’s
       insistence that she’s doing political theory rather than political philosophy, I will
       be reading her as engaging issues that are paradigmatically within the scope of
       political philosophy.                                 
         Finally, I should also note that I am not remotely a Shklar scholar – I know only
       parts of her work and will rely here on an even smaller part. The extent of this prob-
       lem is at least partly attenuated by the absence of any historical or even exegetical
       ambitions here.                                       
         We can start explaining analytical philosophy’s attitude toward Shklar by noting
       some possible explanations that are as clear as they are uninteresting.
         First, Shklar’s style of writing is not the one an analytic philosopher in training
       typically reads. Her texts – while, I think, often beautifully written, and not exactly
       hard to read– are not typically argumentative, certainly not transparently so. This is
       not just a point about what different people are used to reading. It’s also a normative
       judgment: In “The Liberalism of Fear,” for instance, there is a central argument, I
       believe (one that I reconstruct in Enoch, 2023). And the text would have been better
       – at least if considered as a philosophical text – if its main claim was more clearly

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       500                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       stated. Shklar’s style – while obviously engaging – is, for someone like me, primar-
       ily a problem to overcome, at least in many of her texts
         Second, there’s the role of history. For Shklar, history is central to her work in
       political philosophy. I think it’s fair to say that this applies both to the history of
       politics and to the history of political philosophy. Shklar seems to think that there’s
       no way of doing political philosophy well without engaging both these histories.
       Indeed, at one point Shklar accuses other forms of liberalism as precisely lacking
       in historical awareness (1989, p. 27). At least officially, though – to the extent that
       anything here is official – analytic philosophers are much less into history. It is easy,
       therefore, for an analytically trained philosopher to have a look at Shklar’s texts,
       classify her as someone primarily doing history of philosophy (or even worse, his-
       tory of ideas), and leave it at that.                 
         Third, it must be admitted that some of Shklar’s texts are simply not at all philo-
       sophically good. For instance, in many texts Shklar defends a kind of skepticism,
       or what certainly looks like metaethical skepticism. But these discussions – please
       remember that I say this as a fan of much of Shklar’s work – are just sub par. They
       are confused, they fail to make basic distinctions, the main thesis is unclear, nor is
       it clear that Shklar consistently endorses it; in her last published paper “Rights in
       the Liberal tradition” (1992), I couldn’t find a trace of such skepticism. If you are an
       analytically trained philosopher – certainly, a metaethicist – and the first Shklar texts
       you come across are those, you’re not going to have enough patience to get to “The
       Liberalism of Fear.”                                  
         This is not the whole picture, of course: I’ve been focusing on these analytic flaws
       because the general explanatory task here is to explain analytic philosophy’s ignor-
       ing Shklar. For a fuller picture, it’s important to see also that at times Shklar shows
       an excellent analytic mind. For instance: Shklar discusses (1989, p. 24) the tendency
       to associate liberalism with atheism, relativism and nihilism. She comments: “The
       original mistake is the failure to distinguish psychological affinities from logical
       consequences.” This is an important distinction that analytic philosophers may insist
       on, and that many others (including many political theorists) may not. Here, then,
       Shklar is on “our” side. The same is true – perhaps even more clearly and impor-
       tantly – when Shklar rejects relativism (1989, pp. 34-35). But in many contexts,
       Shklar fails to put this analytic mind to proper use. 
         Similar problems arise also within the more political texts that I think so highly
       of – either because they may, to an extent, rely on the kind of skepticism Shklar goes
       for elsewhere (Douglass and Hall, forthcoming; Gatta, 2018; Misra, 2016; Yack,
       1999),or for independent reasons. For instance, consider her claims that “the only
       exception to the rule of avoidance is the prevention of greater cruelties” (1989, p.
       30). If Shklar had hoped to ground a call for governmental constraint based on the
       priority of the need to avoid cruelty, she should have noticed that in this sentence
       she is giving away the game. Pretty much any governmental overstep can be justified
       according to her “only exception.”                    
         The previous explanations shoulder some of the explanatory burden – they
       explain, at least partly, why philosophers tend to read Shklar less, say, than theo-
       rists in political science departments, why philosophy professors are less likely to
       be impressed with her texts, why they are less likely to assign them to their students.

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            501      
                                                             
       But I don’t think this is the whole story. “The Liberalism of Fear” was published
       thirty-five years ago. It has been continuously receiving attention from the kind of
       political science people whom philosophers also read. It has even received some
       attention from central philosophers. Michael Walzer (1996), for instance, is certainly
       a highly influential philosopher, even if not your paradigmatic analytic philosopher.
       By now, the news about that central Shklar text should have spread around philoso-
       phy departments as well.                              
         I want to suggest, then, that there’s a more substantive tension between the way
       Shklar thinks of politics and the way analytic philosophers have been thinking about
       it (but not – I then proceed to argue – the way analytic philosophers should be think-
       ing about politics). And I want to take my first clue here from Shklar herself, when
       she criticizes (and ridicules) Charles Taylor and other communitarians. Here is
       Shklar: “Taylor seems to dwell on the sunny side of the street: Montaigne without
       contempt, Pope without misanthropy, no Swift at all, Rousseau without his curses,
       romanticism without violence, Dostoyevsky without gloom and rage, and finally,
       modernist authors engaged in epiphanies, among whom Beckett is not to be found”
       (Shklar, 1991c, p. 106). I think that what Shklar says here about communitarians is
       true of at least the dominant parts of political philosophy in the analytic tradition in
       Shklar’s time– and alas, today as well. Rawls too – when insisting on doing ideal
       theory – seems to dwell on the sunny side of the street, as do the scores of political
       philosophers for whom Rawls defines the field (see Enoch, 2015). Shklar refuses to
       play this game – she insists on taking a down-to-earth view of the real world and
       then trying to come up with a political philosophy (even if she would resist this title)
       that takes the world into account. This is why her political philosophy remains alien
       to many political philosophers. Indeed, because for many Rawls defines the field,
       Shklar may be seen as engaging an entirely different project, one that is too different
       from mainstream (read: Rawlsian or at least Rawlsian-inspired) political philosophy.
       Add to these the observations from the previous section – an analytic philosopher
       who nevertheless tries to read Shklar is likely to be struck by its being not suffi-
       ciently argumentative, too historical, and at times not sufficiently good – and what
       you get is fewer Stanford Encyclopedia entries than some people who haven’t even
       received tenure yet.                                  
         If this is right, this doesn’t only explain why Shklar is alien to much of (analytic)
       political philosophy. It also shows how Shklar is clearly right, and why reading
       Shklar was such a breath of fresh air for me. For when we do political philosophy,
       at least if we want to have anything at all to contribute to political debates in the
       real world – we should not dwell on the sunny side of the street. Rather, we should
       look at reality and form a realistic – even if depressing, as the case may be – view
       of the world that defines our political problems, and then, if we can, do what we
       can to better understand these problems and devise ways of addressing or contain-
       ing them. None of this means that we should desert all hope for a normative edge
       (Enoch, 2018), or even, as Katrina Forrester (2011) finds in Shklar’s own earlier
       texts, a more central role for hope. We should, of course, proclaim about how things
       ought to be done politically. But we should do it in a way that is based on a realis-
       tic view of the world. We should avoid attempts to start with some ideal and then
       distort our picture of the world in a way that is shaped by the relevant ideal. That

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       502                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       would be like moving to the sunny side of the street, enjoying its warmth, and then
       convincing ourselves that it’s sunny everywhere, so that we can refuse to satisfy the
       energy needs of those who still live where it’s colder.
         Perhaps this is why Shklar thinks history is so central to doing political philoso-
       phy well (though notice that this applies only to the history of politics, not to the his-
       tory of political philosophy). For it is by studying the history of politics, presumably,
       that one understands what is and what is not humanly possible, for what the main
       dangers of politics are. I want to agree with this, but only partly: I agree with Shklar
       that knowledge of the real world is crucial for doing (non-ideal theory) political phi-
       losophy well. I also agree that often studying history can be helpful in generating
       such knowledge. I don’t agree, though, that this is the only or even most central way
       of generating such knowledge (Shklar doesn’t anywhere, as far as I know, say that it
       is, but that is what she seems to be presupposing.) Sometimes, for instance, doing
       empirical political science will be more important; think of how some such empiri-
       cal science informs the non-ideal, if still normative, discussions in democratic the-
       ory (Brennan, 2017). Shklar (1967, p. 277) herself expresses a similar attitude to the
       empirical sciences’ role in keeping “psychological, economic, and historical specu-
       lations” at bay. Moreover, there may be important things about the real world that
       it’s very hard to learn from history or from some cleverly designed empirical experi-
       ment or observation – think about wide generalizations about people’s motives and
       behavior, of the kind that are clearly empirical, but that every respectable empirical
       scientist will be very reluctant to make. In such cases, we’re just going to have to do
       our best with the limited resources available to us – look at reality with our best eyes
       and try to report what we see.                        
         Indeed, I think that some of Shklar’s greatness is precisely in doing that, in look-
       ing perceptively at reality as she sees it, and appreciating the implications of reality
       being the way it is, without any sugarcoating. Her eyes, in other words, seem to
       me some of the best we have. Consider, for instance, her impatience with anarchist
       utopias: “… even if the theories of anarchism were less flawed, the actualities of
       countries in which law and government have broken down is not encouraging. Does
       anyone want to live in Beirut?” (1989, pp. 36-37). Or consider her insightful – now
       seen as almost prophetical – claims about fascism: “Anyone who thinks that fas-
       cism in one guise or another is dead and gone ought to think again” (1989, p. 22).
       Shklar is clearly and importantly right – and very different from mainstream politi-
       cal philosophy – in insisting that we should do political philosophy with these facts
       in mind, and not assume them away so that we can theorize more easily. Unlike the
       infamous economist from that joke, we shouldn’t be pretending that we have a solu-
       tion to our problems by assuming a can-opener.        
         The real challenge, rather, is the one that stares racism, xenophobia and brutal-
       ity directly in the eyes, and then tries to reach normative conclusions (perhaps
       along the lines of the liberalism of fear), not to assume a can-opener, and develop
       a “less urgent” form of liberalism (and, as if this is not bad enough, proceed to
       pretend that it applies to the real world as we find it). There is, of course, some-
       thing very tempting about assuming a can-opener – if nothing else, it’s typically
       a much easier path for a theorist than finding a way that can actually open the can
       in the real world. Even Shklar at times succumbs to this temptation, and is not

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            503      
                                                             
       realistic enough, and too optimistic in a way that compromises her political phi-
       losophy. I think that this is so both when she is – perhaps following J.S. Mill – far
       too optimistic about speech and truth (1992, p. 29), and in her uncompromis-
       ing rejection of any attribution of false consciousness (Gatta, 2018, p. 13; Kauf-
       mann., 2020, p. 14; For my own view see Enoch, 2020). But it is one of the most
       important lessons to be learnt from Shklar that this temptation is to be resisted.
         The alienation between Shklar on the one side and late-twentieth and early
       twenty-first century political philosophy in the analytic tradition is thus partly
       the result of precisely Shklar’s clearest advantages. More depressingly, this also
       means that this alienation is a strong indication of the failures of at least the main-
       stream tradition in political philosophy. So much, then, for what may explain why
       Shklar has so little influence in political philosophy, perhaps especially among
       analytic philosophers. What, if anything, should we do about it?
         We should use Shklar and her sharp eyesight as a mere means. To an extent,
       this is true of how we should relate – on the standard analytic philosophy pic-
       ture– to any Great Dead Philosopher: Our interest is always substantive rather
       than historical or exegetical, and so we are not intrinsically interested in how to
       read, say, Descartes, or Kant, or, indeed, Shklar. But this shouldn’t stop us from
       getting whatever help we can get – in addressing the substantive issues – from
       anyone; merely being a Great Dead Philosopher does not disqualify one as a pos-
       sible source of such help. And so, we should treat Shklar as a source of impor-
       tant insights, and as an important antidote to the way much of the field has been
       developing. Whether she would be happy with us doing that, whether she’d like
       to be read by political philosophers (rather than political theorists), whether she’d
       agree with our conclusions, even whether she’s careful, rigorous, and philosophi-
       cally good in other parts of her work – all of this is just beside the point.
         To do this well, we must recognize that all the ways in which Shklar is such
       a breath of fresh air compared to contemporary mainstream political philoso-
       phy are entirely contingent. True, political philosophy has been developing in
       the “assume a can opener” direction. But this is a contingent point. It’s not as if
       political philosophy, by its very nature, must be flawed in this way. So, the way
       to make use of Shklar is precisely to steer political philosophy in more Shklarian
       direction. Of course, when we do this, we must do better than Shklar in living up
       to the standards of clarity, explicitness, rigor, and argumentativeness that analytic
       philosophy aspires to. For another example, consider the centrality, for Shklar, of
       power, a phenomenon and concept that some mainstream political philosophers
       seem to have forgotten (though not all: talk of non-domination, for instance,
       seems to be on the rise). I think that Shklar is absolutely right that we need to
       do political philosophy – and in particular, liberal political philosophy – that has
       much more to say of power and that takes it into account in a central way. And
       she’s also right that we probably haven’t been doing a good enough job of this.
       But this too is contingent, and the lesson to learn here is that we should find room
       in our liberal political philosophy for an empirically (and perhaps historically)
       informed account of political power, hierarchies, and so on. (I make a step in that
       direction in thinking of false consciousness from a liberal perspective elsewhere
       (Enoch, 2020))                                        

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       504                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
         Perhaps such Shklarian analytic political philosophy will be less “exhilarating.”
       It may even seem to some, as Shklar anticipates, objectionably reductive. But as she
       also says rightly, “There is nothing ‘reductive’ about building a political order on the
       avoidance of fear and cruelty unless one begins with a contempt for physical experi-
       ence” (1989, p. 32). Well, whoever thought political philosophy was supposed to
       be exhilarating? I don’t even think it’s supposed to be inspiring. It’s supposed to be
       insightful, to supply understanding of the political, and at least sometimes, to offer
       normative conclusions about how to proceed. And to do those things, analytic politi-
       cal philosophy should go Shklarian, at least to an extent.
         David Enoch                                         
       An affective reading of Judith Shklar                 
                                                             
                                                             
       Biographers of Shklar might find it strange to emphasize the emotionality of her
       work, given that she was known among her colleagues and friends for her intellec-
       tual rigor and relentless (but often fair) criticisms. Indeed, it might be said, that peo-
       ple were “fearful” of her comments at conferences and when reviewing their work
       – it was nothing short of “intellectual toughness” (Hoffmann, 1993, pp. 172–173).
       Yet the idea of fear, the guiding concept of the book chapter she is perhaps most
       famous for, is itself one that elicits and draws on our emotions. It is the feeling of an
       aversion to cruelty and a shared concern for it, that motivates one to consider why a
       “liberalism of fear” could be compelling in the first place.
         Now it would be remiss not to remark on Shklar’s own personal experience with a
       political sphere dominated by cruelty. Writing in the aftermath of the Second World
       War, she saw her own family forced to find refuge, and a society reckoning with
       the fallout from the domination across Europe of various kinds of totalitarianism
       (Walzer, 1981). The idea that liberalism had failed was on the mind of many intel-
       lectuals of her time (including herself), and those who were interested in preserving
       liberalism found themselves in search of a more stable foundation (Müller, 2008;
       Cherniss, 2023).                                      
         So fear seems like an obvious, if pragmatic, choice. It relies upon a fundamental
       intuition, that “evil is cruelty and the fear it inspires, and the very fear of fear itself”
       (Shklar, 1989, p. 29). It also has an advantage of setting the bar for liberalism rather
       low, as it is not a philosophy concerned with “how people are to conduct their lives”
       (p. 21) but one which has comparably modest goals – making “cruelty and fear the
       basic norm of its political practices and prescriptions” (p. 30). (Scholars who choose
       to emphasize this reading of Shklar include Alan Kahan (2023).) Her close friend
       John Rawls goes so far as to note that the account she offers in “Liberalism of Fear”
       is synonymous with his own project of political liberalism, remarking of his own
       work that it is “not a novel doctrine.” But in order for fear to be a persuasive princi-
       ple, one has to have a sense of connection to it. We as members of a political com-
       munity have to understand what it is we are afraid of, and this informs a desire to
       avoid it at all costs.                                
         Over the course of this contribution, I want to offer readers an account of
       Shklar and her works as ones fundamentally aimed at self-reflection. I am going

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            505      
                                                             
       to focus on two of Shklar’s projects, in order to show how emotionality plays
       out in her writing. The first is in what some might argue is a continuation of the
       “liberalism of fear,” her book Ordinary Vices. The second is her final academic
       project, the questions she had before her death on political obligation. Now, there
       is a lively debate in Shklar scholarship as to whether or not she wants to offer
       her readers a theory of conduct in her approach to political theory (Bajohr, 2019;
       Douglass and Hall, forthcoming; Marriot, 2024). Setting these questions aside,
       what I seek to demonstrate is merely the value of thinking about how one feels
       when reading a text and the feelings in turn it invites one to reflect upon. It is not
       that Shklar had a theory of emotions and politics, but simply that she recognized
       the significant role they have in political life. Where people might be tempted
       to go wrong with Shklar I argue, is that they lose themselves in trying to trace
       out the arguments at the expense of considering their own experiences as they
       go through her works. Just as we are inclined to be swept away in a passionate
       romance of a novel, so too should we allow ourselves the same experience when
       reading Shklar, as this allows us to reflect on the personal nature of these political
       problems in a way rational argument alone cannot capture.
         For a book about political philosophy, Ordinary Vices spends much more time
       discussing Molière than Machiavelli. The integration of novels, plays, and operas
       may strike some readers as strange, but for Shklar it is necessary, since philosophers
       (for all their talk of virtue) rarely talk about vice (Shklar, 1984, p. 7). For those
       unfamiliar with the work, Shklar provides an account and overview of the political
       implication of five vices: cruelty, hypocrisy, snobbery, betrayal/treachery, and mis-
       anthropy. Of these, she argues that cruelty ought to be ranked first among the vices
       (Shklar, 1984, p. 8). The ordering of the rest of the vices is unclear and ultimately
       unnecessary, since to live in a reasonably liberal and reasonably democratic soci-
       ety requires that individuals tolerate them all. Their “ordinary” nature speaks to an
       emphasis on observation and the relatively normal role they play in our lives. Not
       only are these traits identifiable in our friends or colleagues - but they are something
       we are able to understand because we have experienced them ourselves. As Susan
       Wolf observes, the world isn’t filled with moral saints, nor would we want it to be
       (2015, pp. 11–19). The first-person experience of the vices is an essential starting
       point for the story Shklar wants to tell. It is the personal relationship which we have
       to the vices that allows for an affective form of engagement to be effective. So, what
       are the emotional experiences the book takes readers through and allows them to
       confront, and what is the methodological way it does so?
         To provide just a couple of examples, consider first betrayal. The chapter begins
       with a question: ‘Who has not been betrayed or betrayed someone?’ (Shklar, 1984,
       p. 138). It is so commonplace on this telling that surely as readers we have some
       familiarity with it. Betrayal particularly draws our attention to such a degree that
       Shklar contends we are forced to stand “between intellectual incoherence and pas-
       sionate feeling” (p. 138). One of the peculiarities of this vice she notes, is that it
       evokes such a strong emotional reaction (p. 139). Snobs for instance are easier com-
       pany to tolerate. These emotional responses to betrayal are not simply the result of
       watching great dramas like the movie Casablanca (1942); they are also present in a
       failure from others to live up to their promises (p, 139). This shows the seemingly

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       506                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       benign way in which trust is jeopardized or unfulfilled and results in a sense of
       injustice (p. 139).                                   
         The decision to betray also appears at times a complicated one, and there are
       many situations where a certain sympathy is appropriate for the circumstances
       which require it. One might be forced for example to choose between a friend and
       their lover, or one’s own needs juxtaposed with the needs of family, and that has an
       impact on both those who lose out and those forced to make the choice (p. 141). The
       feeling of betrayal itself is a distinct kind of experience, which may not result in any
       particular party or cause to hold accountable (p. 141). The ambiguity of betrayal,
       the difficulties in determining with precision exactly what wrong was done and by
       whom, does not make those felt sentiments any easier to live with. Shklar notes at
       the end of the chapter that “nothing can lessen the pain and anger of feeling betrayed
       by friends, fellow citizens, partners, and allies” (p. 190).
         Misanthropy by comparison is a vice of distrust. The fact it follows the chap-
       ter on betrayal makes sense, because to live in a world filled with betrayal, one is
       forced to confront one’s own view of others within it. Distrust has a value politically,
       and Shklar points to representative government as an example of diffusing power
       throughout the general population, which is especially clear in Montesquieu’s ide-
       alized separation of powers (pp. 196-197). Not every type of misanthropy leads to
       Machiavelli, and it can be associated more broadly with concerns about power and
       what people will do with it – hence that is why it is a particularly appealing vice for
       liberals. Yet it also closes individuals off from one another, and friendship as a value
       requires an openness contrary to it (p. 215). The negative perspective on humanity,
       which a misanthropic view seems to imply, could be reframed as “seeing people as
       they are” with the recognition of their vicious tendencies and a desire to avoid them
       at all costs.                                         
         Betrayal and misanthropy, like fear, are concepts which would lose their force if
       they were not associated with emotional experiences. Shklar is not putting forward
       a theory which requires that she settles how or what we feel or attempts to offer an
       account which indicates the appropriate levels of fear or betrayal are present in par-
       ticular situations. What she identifies more concretely is the importance of how it is
       the sense of betrayal and distrust which defines and constitutes the vices and indeed
       what normalizes them. The vices are representations of felt experiences, and our
       interpretations of the emotions connected to those experiences.
         Stories are an essential way to evoke emotions, and to create an imaginary space
       to explore what those emotions mean to their audiences. Although there are debates
       in the philosophy of aesthetics which contest the idea that art forms need to express
       emotions, emotions seem intrinsically to be part of the appeal. What Shklar offers at
       the end of Ordinary Vices is a defense of storytelling, which she hopes will add clar-
       ity and precision to how politics is thought about, even if it leaves more problems
       to be solved since “stories expose rather than create order, and in doing so they can
       render explicit much that is inarticulate” (p. 230). The art of storytelling, be it fic-
       tional or historical, is part of the tradition of political theory (p. 231). It is a medium
       which allows for an exploration of the contradictions and ambiguities intrinsic to a
       wide range of source material, including these vices (p. 249). Yet stories, especially
       of character, would be uninteresting (or at least far less compelling) if they were

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            507      
                                                             
       unable to connect to audiences on an emotional level. Shklar’s description of the
       vices must be understood in this way, one which exposes not only the ordinariness
       of our encounters with vice, but also how they make us feel about ourselves and oth-
       ers in our personal and public lives.                 
         In a letter to her close friend Allan Bloom, Shklar asks for his advice on the
       course she is designing on political obligation, and she notes how political obliga-
       tion “is what I have thought about for most of my life” (Shklar, 2019). Her posthu-
       mously published lectures on that topic are a tour of curiosities for those interested
       in an extensive survey of political thought, and they begin from the familiar question
       of what obedience one owes to the government and to members of one’s community
       (Shklar, 2019 [1992], p. xx). The source material is similar to that encountered in
       Ordinary Vices, as Shklar draws on a variety of historical, narrative, and fictional
       examples to discuss the nuances and contours of these debates. It is a form of teach-
       ing through example, one where the conclusions may be ambiguous, and one that
       relies on the ability to connect to individuals in a way that resonates with their expe-
       riences. The question of loyalty proves a clarifying example of how Shklar draws a
       firm relationship between the emotions and political life.
         Shklar’s explicit project on political obligation started relatively late in her career,
       and it led Shklar to take an interest in the question of exiles (Shklar, 1993). A lecture
       delivered on the subject in the year of her death opens with a consideration of what
       one can demand of an individual whose political community has rejected them, or
       who (for a variety of reasons) are no longer able see themselves as members of that
       community (p. 187). Individuals, who were once citizens, now stand as outcasts.
       Exiles serve as a crucial case study for thinking through the tensions which emerge
       between the political obligations one has to a community, the loyalty one feels as
       a member of it, and the sense of betrayal which is demonstrated in practices such
       as forcible exclusion (pp. 181-182). Shklar identifies these tensions in both ancient
       examples (relying on Thucydides) and those closer to the modern day, such as the
       cases of Captain Dreyfus and Henry David Thoreau (pp. 188-189, 190-195). As she
       recounts these stories, one is struck again by the use of narratives in order to illus-
       trate the political problems which Shklar is interested in. Fictional or real, these nar-
       ratives are able to captivate their audiences because of their emotional salience.
         One of the important observations on which Shklar grounds her lecture is that
       “loyalty and obligation are generally used interchangeably as if they were identical”
       (p. 183). Although both terms have a variety of competing definitions, on Shklar’s
       telling there are two main ways that loyalty is distinct: it aims at partial attachments,
       and it is “deeply affective and not primarily rational” (p. 184). This can be con-
       trasted with the rule-bound character of our obligations, which have a similarity
       closer to duties. Affect, as discussed throughout this contribution, requires an emo-
       tional appeal. It is a reflection not of how one thinks but rather how one feels. The
       language of loyalty is therefore grounded in the emotions, constituted for example
       by a protective attitude toward a friend or family member, and it is one of the “affec-
       tive ties that bind us together” (p. 197).            
         Within the public sphere, the clearest illustration of primary loyalty (and the one
       that dominated discourse at the time Shklar was speaking) is nationalism (p. 186).
       Returning to her lectures On Political Obligation, Shklar explains how the specific

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       508                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       appeal of nationalism is that “it draws no distinction between loyalty and obliga-
       tion” (Shklar, 2019 [1992], p. 156). It establishes an emotional bond with the nation,
       one which justifies a particular view of others as belonging to, or excluded from, a
       specific community. Loyalty for Shklar is therefore a double-edged sword. Although
       loyalty may be directed toward personal relationships and the cultivation of virtue,
       the ideological loyalties of the twentieth century “have made the past two centuries a
       hell on earth for many people” (p. 165). The affective nature of loyalty can serve to
       explain both its positive and negative consequences, and Shklar notes the relevance
       of this for political theory since “the most spectacular conflicts of loyalty” are politi-
       cal (1984, p. 157).                                   
         The interplay between obligation and loyalty, alongside concepts such as commit-
       ment, allegiance, and fidelity, constitutes a way of framing discourse about political
       life in terms of the relationships which individuals have with one another, and the
       emotional bonds which exist within those relationships. Although fidelity is closer
       to our hearts, and obligation a reflection of duties, they are all relevant in under-
       standing the scope of how we engage in a shared community life. Politics (as most
       of us know it) is not a calm and rational deliberative process but rather is a heated
       and passionate affair that feels personal.            
         Individuals relate to one another in public through a discourse laden with senti-
       ment, and appropriately so; or at least inevitably so, given a politics which takes for
       granted a pluralism of perspectives and a diversity of ways of living. What Shklar
       attempts to set out in her reflections and lectures on political obligation is the iden-
       tification of the political relevance of these sentiments. The invitation to the reader
       (again) is one which speaks to a reflection about their own loyalties and attachments,
       about the exclusions which are an essential part of it, and about their sense of obli-
       gation (Shklar, 1993, p. 195). Shklar would surely approve of the statement that one
       does not need to have a PhD from Harvard in order to have views and opinions on
       these matters. They are first and foremost problems which engage us from a human
       perspective because of their emotional character.     
         The arts are typically viewed as the appropriate realm for emotional appeals. We
       are angered at Don Giovanni who thinks he can abuse love in order to hold power
       over women, saddened by the loss of Medea, and some of us even like a “happily
       ever after” (Shklar, 1984, p. 153). Shklar reminds us, though, that political theory
       is a discourse that cannot involve such a fairy tale (Shklar, 1993, pp. 196-197). The
       fact that the task of political theory is never-ending means that we need to take seri-
       ously how it is we are investigating and inquiring, and indeed how to look for new
       spaces to explore ideas and to think through what politics is. This is not merely an
       academic endeavor but is crucial for all individuals who are members of a political
       community. This contribution has put forward a reading of Shklar and her works
       which centers on, not only her uses and incorporation of stories, but more spe-
       cifically on the emotional appeal which these stories make. Their affective nature
       allows for an exploration of feeling, something which privileges internal reflection
       as a starting point for theoretical inquiry. It also recognizes the flawed, ambiguous,
       and difficult nature of solving political problems.   
         The unfinished project Shklar left us with, to observe and interrogate political
       life, is as crucial as ever. To figure out what we owe to one another in a climate,

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            509      
                                                             
       where cruelty seems to be an increasingly common currency, appears a daunting and
       difficult task. Populism, polarization, and nationalism are the new language of loy-
       alty, rooted in the rhetoric of feeling. That is why recognizing the role emotions play
       in politics, especially for those who (like Shklar) hold any sense of liberal sympa-
       thies, is so crucial here. Yet even if one finds oneself unconvinced by the ideological
       views of Shklar, and by her broader arguments, one needs to look at her works in a
       way that values emotional experiences and one can then more fully understand why
       she is such an essential voice in political theory today. That understanding can also
       remind us as political theorists that we study political theory not only because we
       love it, but also because it matters far beyond our ivory tower discourses.
         Shal Marriott                                       
                                                             
       John Stuart Mill and Judith Shklar                    
                                                             
       Shklar loved Montaigne and Montesquieu—not Mill. Every theorist is entitled to
       her taste, of course, in authors to exult in as much as in ice cream flavors to eat. But
       the exclusion of Mill, and of what he stood for, from Shklar’s work went incredibly
       far, misrepresenting the chronological origins and moral core of liberalism. The con-
       sequences have been high for mainstream portrayals of the history and significance
       of political liberalism. In particular, Shklar’s priorities revealed an insensibility to
       romanticism and how it shaped modern liberalism — indeed, at its point of origin.
         This short contribution builds upon my recent digest of Shklar’s unacceptable
       views about liberalism and romanticism, highlighting now what she had to say about
       Mill and Mill’s liberalism from one end of her career to another (Moyn, 2023). I
       tried to show how deep Shklar’s allergy for “antipolitical” romanticism went, as if it
       were defined exclusively as an abstentionist withdrawal of l’art pour l’art. A bit bet-
       ter than other Cold War portrayals of romanticism as protofascist, Shklar’s depiction
       nonetheless left a lot out. Mill’s case is perhaps the most potent reminder of how
       romanticism made liberalism what it was in the beginning.
         It is useful to think of Shklar’s career in two stages, and her treatment of Mill
       helps revisit their relationship. Ironically, it was before the transformation in her atti-
       tudes and focus that Shklar was closest to the currently ascendant chronology of lib-
       eralism — dating it, like Helena Rosenblatt, to the early nineteenth century (2018).
       Slowly, from that point on, Shklar backdated its origins to the early modern period
       and characterized it as a negative project of damage control.
         Mill became a casualty of this transformation. Starting in the 1970s, Shklar was
       more drawn to the early modern tradition that offered a more cynical moral psy-
       chology — as Shklar showed, an immensely powerful one for grounding a dysto-
       pian and dyspeptic liberalism. Her retrieval of this sort of outlook from premodern
       and indeed preliberal voices, from Thomas Hobbes on, led to extraordinary work.
       It also left a hole in her accounts of the inception and meaning of liberalism where
       Mill could have been. Examining her comments on Mill provides a better sense how
       close to the precipice of her mature views Shklar was from the start. The distance
       she would have to travel was nevertheless undeniable. 
                                                             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       510                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
         Shklar’s engagement with Mill in her dissertation-turned-first-book are, I believe,
       her most extensive. They occur as part of her case that, congenitally, the liberal
       movement feared disaster and lacked “self-confidence.” She cast Mill as an out-
       lier in relation to other founding liberals such as Lord Acton, Benjamin Constant,
       and Alexis de Tocqueville in his “indifferent” attitude toward religion in general
       and Christianity in particular (1957, p. 227). But, she adds, he was like other early
       liberals in his conservative response to the shock of the French Revolution, which
       encouraged them all to embrace caution in the face of the obduracy of ordinary peo-
       ple to being emancipated. Earlier optimism – such as in Mill’s Autobiography, and
       also the optimism of his father – had been revealed by the French Revolution and its
       aftermath as little more than “sonorous phrases” (1957, p. 228). Liberalism, even
       Mill’s, was defined from the start by its doubts about the enlightenment project,
       though “no liberal was ready to follow [Edmund] Burke all the way” (1957, p. 228).
         That there is nothing to this presentation hardly means it does not sweep a great
       many alternative views under the rug. Mill, a pessimist? Recognizing that this inter-
       pretation flew in the face of much his writing, Shklar nonetheless conceded some
       other evidence but insisted that Mill remained “harassed by doubts” (1957, p. 229).
       True, Mill “made a powerful argument in favor of the educational values of rep-
       resentative government,” but principally to produce a case for disproportionate
       roles (and votes) for the already educated, in case the common man rejected liberal
       change (1957, p. 230). (Shklar didn’t mention Mill’s feminism.)
         Needless to say, such criticism of liberal pessimism, right or wrong, would recede
       in Shklar’s thinking, as she became the most famous liberal pessimist and turned
       in her subsequent writings to seek the forebears of such a position in the eight-
       eenth century or even before. Even so, the continuation of her comments about Mill
       in After Utopia suggests some of the reasons why she would end up missing not
       just the emancipatory stance of the earliest liberals, but the very content of their
       philosophy.                                           
         Mill, a liberal, was also a romantic (Constant and Tocqueville were, too). It is
       crucial that Shklar did not know what to make of this fact, and so she downplayed it.
       “The two can appear together at times,” she remarks of liberalism and romanticism,
       “but the differences between romantic and liberal thinking remain clear enough”
       (1957, p. 231). Shklar did not discuss liberalism in her earlier chapters on romanti-
       cism in After Utopia, and her treatment in the chapter on liberals indicates that she
       held their relationship (once she finally turned to its occurrence) to be almost acci-
       dental. Their collocation in the same thinker(s) is treated as almost like the intrusion
       of a foreign element into a matrix: “That the state may not interfere with society,”
       the liberal precept, “is of an entirely different order than the idea that a man’s first
       duty is to develop an original personality,” the romantic credo (1957, p. 231.).
         Of course, even a casual familiarity with Mill’s On Liberty (or the texts of Con-
       stant or Tocqueville) suggests the implausibility of this scheme. For Mill, individual-
       ity is the end of liberalism, and restrictions on institutions (including most obviously
       the state) are the means to that end. The point isn’t that originality and non-inter-
       ference are identical. It is that, for Mill, the means of institutionalizing limits on
       state action could not fully define his liberalism. Rather, romanticism and liberalism
       were inextricable in defining the ends of life and therefore political life. Had Shklar

[PAGE 22]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            511      
                                                             
       pondered this obvious flaw in her portrait of Mill, it might have led her to correct her
       critique of romanticism, which she presented as antipolitical and antisocial (1957,
       chs 2-4; Moyn, 2023, ch. 2.). For Mill, romanticism provided the goals for politics
       and society. Indeed, it was for this reason, as he reports in his Autobiography, that
       he broke with his father and his hedonistic account of the good, not merely with the
       belief in the imminent arrival of a reformed society. 
         Shklar didn’t return to Mill until late in life, and glancingly at that. When she did
       so, she judged the intersection of his liberalism with his romanticism more clearly,
       but from the secure position of the “liberalism of fear” that she had spent her inter-
       vening life developing.                               
         In her lovely Storrs Lectures for 1988 at Yale Law School, published two years
       later as The Faces of Injustice, Shklar specified that, among the many philosophers
       who had privileged the investigation of justice over that of injustice, Mill was exem-
       plary. “No serious theory of justice is simply indifferent to injustice of course,”
       Shklar wrote. The trouble was that such frameworks considered injustice to be the
       mere absence of justice. “Normal accounts do begin, as Mill’s typically does, with
       the thought that justice, like many other moral notions, is best defined by its oppo-
       site. He then goes on in very few sentences to tell us what injustice involves … With
       that he leaves the subject, having, in fact, shown only that it is unjust to break the
       rules of normal justice” (Shklar, 1990, pp. 18-19).   
         Shklar’s dissatisfaction stemmed from her view of the rewards to be reaped theo-
       retically from “putting cruelty first” (in her famed slogan of the same era). Now,
       Mill hadn’t been pessimistic enough, in his refusal to take seriously the liability of
       politics to abuse and injury. “He was intellectually averse to contemplating the worst
       historical situations,” she wrote. “It was not surprising that, like so many of his suc-
       cessors, he treated injustice merely as the take-off point for a wholesome and upbeat
       theory of justice” (Shklar, 1990, p. 19). He was not “overwhelmed by the evil of the
       times” (1990, p. 20).                                 
         Of course, Shklar’s comments on Mill capture in miniature the overall reversal in
       her thought. It doesn’t settle whether her earlier or later views were more credible
       (Hall, 2022). But it is notable — a challenge to those who find more continuity than
       change in her career — that the reversal on Mill was so stark. She began by indicting
       how haunted he was by the obstacles and threats to progress, and she ended by task-
       ing him for insufficient concern for cruelty and injustice.
         At the same time, Shklar was far more open to the romantic legacy in Mill’s lib-
       eralism — because now she much more clearly identified it in order to reject it. In
       her classic paper from the next year, “The Liberalism of Fear,” she distinguished
       her approach from the “liberalism of personal development” for which Mill stood.
       “Freedom,” she reported in perfectly capturing the ends/means structure of Mill’s
       On Liberty, “is necessary for personal as well as social progress” (Shklar, 1989, pp.
       8-9). Mill’s liberalism, she acknowledged, was a “perfectly genuine” liberalism, just
       not one that, like hers, “had a strongly developed historical memory” (1990, p. 9).
         I don’t know of a direct statement in Shklar’s later writing on the congenital
       relationship between romanticism and liberalism, or even how the romanticism she
       still regularly derided informed the perfectionist brand she distinguished from the
       liberalism of fear. She certainly continued, just as she had in her earlier work, to

[PAGE 23]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       512                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       denounce romanticism, if always in its illiberal versions. Thus, even as she read Mill
       more properly, it does not seem Shklar ever pondered the meaning of the historical
       intersection of liberalism and romanticism.           
         That Shklar, by the time of her final writings, was far more profligate in calling
       premodern writers like John Locke and the American founders “liberals” made this
       avoidance easier: Mill’s romantic version of liberalism was just one version — and a
       rather latecomer — on the list of liberal frameworks. 
         The consequences of Shklar’s disdain for Mill, and her inability to accord him his
       place in the liberal tradition that he actually helped to found, were grave. Most of
       those she influenced adopted her zeal to make romanticism a dirty word. Another,
       Nancy Rosenblum, was a bit more conciliatory. But it is worth revisiting her excel-
       lent and neglected study Another Liberalism on this score, with an eye to how the
       very corrective she offered continued to operate within the terms of a false problem
       (Rosenblum, 1987).                                    
         That problem, again, is that romanticism and liberalism were separate in the first
       place. Rosenblum emphasized their divergence, before wondering if the one could
       “be brought home” to the other (1987, part III). It was edgy indeed in her school of
       thought to suggest that “romantic responses to liberalism offer powerful resources
       for the reconstruction of liberal thought” (1987, p. 1). And helpfully, amid her pio-
       neering reconsideration of American romantics such as Ralph Waldo Emerson and
       Thoreau (whom Shklar herself later wrote about), Rosenblum did give Mill some
       love in this regard (Shklar, 1991b).                  
         Yet Rosenblum’s general approach was a corrective premised, not merely on
       Shklar’s original separation of romanticism and liberalism, but also on her later
       mistake of regarding romantic liberalism as a belated deviation in the tradition. On
       Rosenblum’s account, romanticism had emerged as a critique from outside the lib-
       eral tradition, as Shklar had always contended, rather than participating in its found-
       ing. “Conventional liberalism” had emerged in the early modern period, Rosenblum
       reported, emphasizing legalism, rights, and stability. For Rosenblum, one might
       therefore say, romanticism was a corrective to Shklar’s (conventional) liberalism.
       Rosenblum’s innovation was to ask what Shklar never had: could romanticism be
       both safe and useful to those within the liberal tradition, nonetheless?
         The results of Rosenblum’s inquiry into how “romanticism can become liberal”
       and how “it is also possible for liberalism to be romanticized” were enlightening
       and even moving. In particular, she claimed, liberalism’s individualist foundations
       did not prohibit acceptance of communitarian objections, just as accommodat-
       ing romantic “heroism” could make liberalism more morally uplifting. Shklar had
       charged from the start that romanticism was antipolitical; Rosenblum suggested that
       its bent for private self-creation abetted liberalism’s own public/private distinction,
       and could promote shifting involvements of people as they lived divided lives as
       citizens and humans.                                  
         The assumption that liberalism and romanticism are a duality reflected Shklar’s
       framework, of course, even if lessening the tension between its poles permitted
       Rosenblum an original intervention. I wouldn’t deny, of course, that some versions
       of romanticism — perhaps even most — were illiberal or non-liberal in conception
       or consequences. But the costs of Shklar’s failure to reckon with the fact that the

[PAGE 24]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            513      
                                                             
       very origins of liberalism were in the romantic commitment to privilege self-crea-
       tion and self-making as the highest life nonetheless strike me as exceptionally high.
         Mill, for one, didn’t accept the public/private distinction; individuality was the
       highest ideal of collective life, and the principle of justification of policies, includ-
       ing, he believed, fairly strict limits to state action, certainly when it came to the reg-
       ulation of opinion and speech (As Rosenblum herself later remarks, Mill “does not
       call on the classical dualism between man and citizen, even to reject it” (1987 133).)
       Yet even in bringing her general corrective in romanticism’s name, Rosenblum’s
       discussion of Mill in particular epitomized Shklar’s own negligence of the roman-
       tic sources of his deepest commitments, the very ones that grounded his libertarian
       policies.                                             
         In her passages on Mill, Rosenblum highlighted his concern with “all-consuming
       private life,” and the risks that privatization poses to public life (1987, p. 129). That
       is an apt description of some of the republican concerns of some early liberals, most
       notably Constant at the end of his Atheneum lecture — which assessed the charac-
       teristic drawbacks of a regime of modern liberty. As Rosenblum explains Mill’s ver-
       sion of such concerns, however, it is almost as if his core ideal of individuality and
       self-development is no more than a means to the end of staving off the syndrome
       of a fully privatized citizenry. “What can encourage men and women to constrain
       themselves to attend to the general interest?” she asks (1987, p. 130). Insightfully,
       she answers, Mill thought individuality could take the form of self-cultivation as a
       public actor, not merely as a private actor. More deeply, she adds, romantic commit-
       ments might provide the motivation for reckoning the aggregate good of policies.
       If “the rational capacity to calculate the greatest happiness of the greatest number”
       was presupposed in Mill’s utilitarian outlook, the “more important cultivation of the
       emotional impetus to perform the calculus in the first place’ had to come from a
       romantic source (1987, p. 130).                       
         Oddly, this approach omits by far the most momentous fact: that Mill altered clas-
       sical utilitarianism in a eudaemonistic direction which prioritized individuality as a
       criterion for assessing good and evil, refusing to treat all pleasure as equivalent. His
       “idea of self-cultivation” may have been “modest” in comparison to other romantics,
       as Rosenblum puts it (1987. P. 134). But he nonetheless considered that self-making
       the aim and end of life. As her discussion continues, Rosenblum was surely right to
       stress that Mill called for limits to state power in order to create the conditions for
       the possibility of individuality. But one cannot understate Mill’s fears, which are
       clearly drawn from Tocqueville, of threats to individuality, posed by modern society,
       distinct from the state. Those fears account for Mill’s extraordinary investment in
       public education — not the limitation of the state — for equipping citizens to hew to
       the public ideal of self-creation.                    
         All told, Rosenblum’s conciliatory treatment of Mill’s concern for self-culti-
       vation certainly did reflect a sympathy for the idea of romantic individuality that
       Shklar never found in herself. Yet it also inherited Shklar’s framing that liberal-
       ism and romanticism were different to begin with and could never achieve more
       than beneficial foreign relations. Mill didn’t think either thing. Investigating Mill’s
       place in Shklar’s liberalism confirms the intellectual costs of two moves in her
       career, one early and one late. She treated romanticism from the first as an alien and

[PAGE 25]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       514                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       antipolitical force, and — while acknowledging the existence of a perfectionist lib-
       eralism — adopted the very pessimism that she had once denounced. Perhaps there
       is no better illustration of those moves than her treatment of Mill over the years, and
       the legacy she left in doing so.                      
         That intellectual costs entail political ones is a more debatable proposition. But
       I believe they do. Liberals are in dire straits today, around the world and in the
       adopted country of Shklar herself. A bleak liberalism has led to bleak times.
         There is a possibility, therefore, that it is long past time to rediscover perfectionist
       liberalism and reject the misanthropic pessimism that has ruled it out. No one could
       guarantee, of course that it would succeed practically, and Mill’s liberalism of hope
       would require its own defense either way. But it is worth another look, beyond the
       constraints and foreclosures of the classic liberalism of fear.
         Samuel Moyn                                         
       Funding The research in David Enoch’s contribution was supported by the Israel Science Foundation,
       within the MAPATS program, grant No. 399/23.          
       Data availability Not applicable                      
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in
       this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in
       a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and
       your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need
       to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
       creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.                 
       References                                            
                                                             
       Bagg, S. (2024) The Dispersion of Power: A Critical Realist Theory of Democracy. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Bagg, S. (2022) Realism against Legitimacy. Social Theory and Practice 48(1): 29–60.
       Bajohr, H. (2019) “The Sources of Liberal Normativity.” In Between Utopia and Realism: The Politi-
         cal Thought of Judith N. Shklar (Eds. Samantha Ashenden and Andreas Hess), Philadelphia:
         University of Pennsylvania Press.                   
       Barrett, J. (2020) Social reform in a complex world. Journal of Ethics and Social Philosophy 17(2):
         103–132.                                            
       Brennan, J. (2017) Against Democracy. Princeton University Press.
       Douglass, R. and Edward Hall. forthcoming. “Judith Shklar’s Ethos of Skeptical Vigilance.” The
         Review of Politics.                                 
       Douglass, R. (2023) Cruelty, injustice, and the liberalism of fear. Political Theory 51(5): 790–813.
         https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/0 09059 17231 16997 9.  
       Enoch, D. (2018) “Against Utopianism: Noncompliance and Multiple Agents.” Philosopher’s Imprint
         18.                                                 
       Enoch, D. (2020) False consciousness for liberals part I: consent, autonomy, and adaptive preferences.
         The Philosophical Review 129: 159–210.              
       Enoch, D. (2023) Politics and suffering. Analytical Philosophy 66(1): 1–25.

[PAGE 26]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       New perspectives on Judith Shklar            515      
                                                             
       Fives, A. (2020) What the victims of tyranny owe each other: on Judith Shklar’s value monism. Res
         Publica 26(4): 505–521. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 11158-0 20-0 9459-z.
       Forrester, K. (2011) Hope and memory in the thought of Judith Shklar. Modern Intellectual History
         8(3): 591–620. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 017/S 14792 44311 00036 9.
       Forrester, K. (2012) Judith Shklar, Bernard Williams and political realism. European Journal of Polit-
         ical Theory 11(3): 247–272. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 47488 51114 30605.
       Galston, W.A. (2010) Realism in political theory. European Journal of Political Theory 9(4): 385–
         411. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 47488 51103 74001.
       Gatta, G. (2018) Rethinking Liberalism for the 21st Century: The Skeptical Radicalism of Judith
         Shklar. Routledge.                                  
       Hall, E. (2025) Power and Powerlessness : The Liberalism of Fear in the Twenty-First Century.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Hall, E. (2022) Complacent and conservative? redeeming the liberalism of fear. The Journal of Poli-
         tics. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 086/7 22343.          
       Hess, A. (2014) The Political Theory of Judith N. Shklar: Exile from Exile. Palgrave Macmillan.
       Hirschman, A. (1991) The Rhetoric of Reaction: Perversity, Futility. Harvard University Press.
       Hoffmann, S. (1993) Judith Shklar as political thinker. Political Theory 21(2): 172–180.
       Kahan, A. (2023) Freedom from Fear: An Incomplete History of Liberalism. Princeton University
         Press.                                              
       Kaufmann, K. (2020) Conflict in political liberalism: Judith Shklar’s liberalism of fear. Res Publica
         26: 577–595.                                        
       Levy, J. (2000) The Multiculturalism of Fear. Oxford University Press.
       Luo, S.S. (2021) Historical memory, democratic citizenship, and political theory: reconstructing a
         historical method in Judith Shklar’s writings. European Journal of Political Theory. https://d oi.
         org/1 0.1 177/1 47488 51209 87762.                  
       Marriott, S. (2024) MA Thesis: In search of a good liberal character: Judith shklar’s literary Approach
         to Political Theory.                                
       Mills, C. (2005) Ideal theory as ideology. Hypatia 20(3): 165–184.
       Misra, S. (2016) Doubt and commitment: justice and skepticism in Judith Shklar’s thought. European
         Journal of Political Theory 15: 77–96.              
       Moyn, S. (2020) “Before—and Beyond—the Liberalism of Fear.” In Between Utopia and Realism:
         The Political Thought of Judith N. Shklar (Eds. Samantha Ashenden and Andreas Hess), Univer-
         sity of Pennsylvania Press, 24–46.                  
       Moyn, S. (2023) Liberalism Against Itself: Cold War Intellectuals and the Making of Our Times. Yale
         University Press.                                   
       Pickford, E. (2024) Judith Shklar on the problem of political motivation. History of European Ideas
         50(7): 1261–1277. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/0 19165 99.2 024.2 34165 4.
       Raekstad, P. (2018) Realism, utopianism, and radical values. European Journal of Philosophy 26(1):
         145–168. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 111/e jop.1 2193.  
       Robin, Corey. (2004) Fear: The History of a Political Idea. Oxford University Press.
       Rosenblatt, H. (2018) The Lost History of Liberalism: From Ancient Rome to the Twenty-First Cen-
         tury. Princeton University Press.                   
       Rosenblum, Nancy. (1987) Another Liberalism: Romanticism and the Reconstruction of Liberal
         Thought. Harvard University Press.                  
       Royer, C. (2022) Introduction: Shklar’s (Underappreciated) international thought. Global Intellectual
         History 7(4): 639–649. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 080/2 38018 83.2 020.1 82608 6.
       Scheuerman, W.E. (2021) Judith N Shklar as theorist of political obligation. European Journal of
         Political Theory 20(2): 366–376. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 177/1 47488 51198 58156.
       Shklar, J. (1957) After Utopia: The Decline of Political Faith. Harvard University Press.
       Shklar, J. (1989) “The Liberalism of Fear.” In Liberalism and the Moral Life (Ed. Nancy Rosenblum),
         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.            
       Shklar, J. (1964) Legalism: Law, Morals, and Political Trials. Harvard University Press.
       Shklar, J. (1990) The Faces of Injustice. Yale University Press.
       Shklar, J. (1991b) Redeeming American Political Theory. The American Political Science Review
         85(1): 3–15. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.2 307/1 96287 5. 
       Shklar, J. (1991c) Review of Charles Taylor, Sources of the Self. Political Theory 19(1): 105–109.
       Shklar, J. (1993) Obligation, loyalty, exile. Political Theory 21(2): 181–197.
       Shklar, J. (2019) On Political Obligation. Yale University Press.

[PAGE 27]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       516                                     R. Buxton et al.
                                                             
       Simmons, J. (2010) Ideal and nonideal theory. Philosophy & Public Affairs 38(1): 5–36. https://d oi.
         org/1 0.1 111/j.1 088-4 963.2 009.0 1172.x.         
       Sleat, Matt. (2013) Liberal Realism: A Realist Theory of Liberal Politics. Manchester University
         Press.                                              
       Stemplowska, Z. (2008) What’s ideal about ideal theory. Social Theory and Practice 34(3): 319–340.
       Stullerova, K. (2014) The knowledge of suffering: On Judith Shklar’s ‘putting cruelty first.’ Contem-
         porary Political Theory 13(1): 23–45. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 057/c pt.2 013.1 2.
       Walzer, Judith. (1981) “Oral History of Tenured Women in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Har-
         vard University.”                                   
       Williams, B. (2005) In the Beginning Was the Deed: Realism and Moralism in Political Argument.
         Princeton University Press.                         
       Yack, B. (1999) Putting injustice first: An alternative approach to liberal pluralism. Social Research
         66(4): 1103–1120.                                   
       Yack, B. (2017) Political liberalism: Political, not philosophical. Perspectives on Politics 15(1): 116–121.
         https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ S1537 59271 60041 75.  
       Young, I.M. (1990) Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton University Press.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             