[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:32            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00809-9            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the         
       Anthropocene                                          
                                                             
                                                             
       Benjamin Folit-Weinberg1 · Jens van ’t Klooster2      
                                                             
       Accepted: 5 October 2025                              
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       What, if anything, is new about the ethical demands that the Anthropocene places
       on human action? We refer to this question as the Anthropocene question, since
       only an ethics that provides a precise answer to that question is properly an eth-
       ics of the Anthropocene. While scholars in the environmental humanities have ad-
       dressed the Anthropocene question, we bring this question to normative theory. To
       this end, we put forward a critical reading of Hans Jonas’s 1979 The Imperative of
       Responsibility, in which he develops normative principles on the basis of a histori-
       cal diagnosis of novelty. Recent developments in scholarship on 5th-century B.C.E.
       Athenian tragedy allows us to challenge Jonas, who at crucial points misdiagnoses
       and overstates this novelty. Using Jonas’s work as an exemplar of a complete ethics
       of the Anthropocene, we highlight the importance of principles for ethical delibera-
       tion: an ethics for the Anthropocene needs not only principles for action, but also
       principles for how to deliberate on action. Criticizing Jonas’s and more recent views
       that democracy is unfit for the Anthropocene, we show that 5th-century Athenian
       tragedy was a sophisticated democratic practice of deliberation of the sort that is
       required for the Anthropocene.                        
       Keywords Anthropocene · Hans Jonas · Normative theory · Precautionary
       principle · Democracy · Greek tragedy                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Benjamin Folit-Weinberg                             
         folit-weinberg.1@osu.edu                            
         Jens van ’t Klooster                                
         j.m.vantklooster@uva.nl                             
       1 Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA      
       2 University of Amsterdam, Postbus 19268, 1000GGAmsterdam, The Netherlands
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 2 of 21                B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       The Anthropocene, a term originally introduced by earth scientists, designates the
       historical era in which human action has become one of the decisive forces shaping
       the earth’s climate and ecosystems (Crutzen, 2006). Though not without its detractors
       (Malm & Hornborg, 2014), the term has been taken up far beyond the natural sci-
       ences to designate a profoundly new historical period (Chakrabarty, 2009; Bonneuil
       & Fressoz, 2017).                                     
         What, if anything, is new about the ethical demands that the Anthropocene places
       on human action? The core premise of this article is that only an ethics that provides
       a precise answer to this question, which we describe as the Anthropocene question,
       is properly an ethics of the Anthropocene. In this article, we build on our respective
       backgrounds in classics and political theory to bring the Anthropocene question to
       normative theory.                                     
         While some have argued that the prospect of catastrophe makes all ethics superflu-
       ous (Scranton, 2015; Hamilton et al., 2015, p. 8), scholars working in the environ-
       mental humanities have led the way in exploring the Anthropocene question. These
       scholars tend to identify ethical challenges raised by the new spatial and temporal
       dimensions of human impact on the planet, but do not theorise these in terms of nor-
       mative principles. With regard to the spatial dimensions, theorists have mentioned
       the inadequacy of state-centric accounts of justice, as well as identifying new ethical
       demands in relation to the non-human environment and, indeed, the planet (Ben-
       nett, 2010; Zylinska, 2014; Latour, 2017). Emphasizing the temporal extension of
       human impact, other defining features concern our impact on future people (Yusoff,
       2013) and pervasive uncertainty about the trajectory of the planet (Morton, 2013,
       pp. 99–133). These features, in turn, raise new challenges for ethical deliberation
       (Tsing, 2015; Haraway, 2016; Ghosh, 2017).            
         Normative theorists have, of course, addressed the topic of human impact on the
       planet (Gardiner et al., 2010; Moellendorf, 2012; Shue, 2014). The complex distribu-
       tion of duties to future generations that mark the Anthropocene is by now the subject
       of an extensive ethical literature that highlights the complex geopolitical, historical,
       intergenerational nature of responsibilities for private individuals, states and global
       governance alike (Cripps, 2013; Gosseries and González-Ricoy. 2016; Caney, 2021;
       Hickey, 2021). Notably, however, normative theorists have not engaged with the his-
       torical dimension of the Anthropocene question; even when the Anthropocene ques-
       tion is posed, it is not answered with reference to the history of ethical and political
       thought (Kelly, 2019; Charbonnier, 2021). This failure to historicise raises the risk
       of underestimating novelty and simply appending the term ‘Anthropocene’ to tradi-
       tional frameworks, considerations, and modes of argument (Dryzek and Pickering,
       2019, pp. 12–17) or failing to acknowledge insight to be gained from established
       modes of theorising (Bargués et al., 2024).           
         In short, while many scholars of the environmental humanities address some ver-
       sion of the Anthropocene question, they do not seek to develop normative principles
       to guide human action; on the other hand, normative theorists fail to historicize the
       Anthropocene properly and rarely if ever give the Anthropocene question the atten-
       tion it deserves. Accordingly, there is a pressing need to develop normative theorizing
       premised on an answer to the Anthropocene question.   

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 3 of 21 32
                                                             
         In fact, there is one thinker who has attempted this task, the German-Jewish phi-
       losopher Hans Jonas. In his The Imperative of Responsibility (1979), among the first
       publications to theorize what we would now call the Anthropocene, Jonas develops a
       new, post-Kantian ethics through a diagnosis of historical novelty. As Jonas argues:
         Modern technology, informed by an ever-deeper penetration of nature and pro-
         pelled by the forces of market and politics, has enhanced human power beyond
         anything known or even dreamed of before. … The altered nature of human
         action, with the magnitude and novelty of its works and their impact on man’s
         global future, raises moral issues for which past ethics, geared to the direct
         dealings of man with his fellowmen within narrow horizons of space and time,
         has left us unprepared (Jonas, 1984, p. ix).        
                                                             
       The ethics that Jonas believes is needed is decidedly Kantian in its ambition to develop
       normative principles to guide human action. In the absence of such principles, Jonas
       believed, humanity risks falling prey to ‘a nihilism in which near-omnipotence is
       paired with near-emptiness, greatest capacity with knowing least for what ends to use
       it’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 29).                             
         Although Jonas’s work has been interpreted in relation to the ethical and philo-
       sophical dimensions of the Anthropocene in passing (Blumenfeld, 2023, p. 162), we
       find in his work a profound analysis of what ethical demands human impact on the
       planet places on action. Beyond situating Jonas in contemporary debates, however,
       we also develop our own ideas by undertaking a critical reading of Jonas’s project of
       developing normative principles on the basis of a historical diagnosis. We focus on
       three closely-related sub-questions concerning the Anthropocene: (i) What genuinely
       new facts about human action characterize today’s context of deliberation? (ii) What
       new ethical principles do these facts imply? (iii) What new practices of deliberation
       are needed to act on those principles? We show that Jonas’s answers to these ques-
       tions constitute an ambitious and compelling, though not infallible, attempt to answer
       the Anthropocene question (Table 1), and we seek to build on them ourselves.
         Our critical reading has two primary objectives. From a historical perspective, we
       challenge and improve Jonas’s diagnosis of novelty. Recent developments in schol-
       arship on 5th-century B.C.E. Athenian tragedy allow us to challenge Jonas’s mis-
       diagnoses and overstatements regarding the novelty of the present situation, since
       these stem from misunderstanding previous eras of profound novelty. Most crucially,
       Jonas uses Greek tragedy to exemplify the ethical order that must be left behind. In
       this, Jonas was mistaken. But that is in itself something positive: since tragedy itself
       responded to uncertainty and novelty in precisely the ways that Jonas thinks we need
       to, tragedy also offers valuable tools for developing an ethics of the Anthropocene.
         Second, we also pursue an agenda-setting objective for contemporary normative
       theory. By distinguishing between the three aspects of novelty (i-iii) that Jonas’s
       work addresses, we showcase what a complete ethics of the Anthropocene could look
       like, with Jonas’s work providing an exemplar. Doing so highlights the importance
       of practices of ethical deliberation, a point which is often neglected: an ethics for
       the Anthropocene needs not just principles for action, but also principles for how to
       deliberate on action. Focusing on the nature of principles for deliberation, we also

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 4 of 21                B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       contribute to recent debates over the Anthropocene and the legitimacy of democratic
       rule (Mittiga, 2021; Fritsch, 2023; White, 2024). Jonas believed that democracies
       would find it hard to meet these ethical standards, but as we show, Athenian democ-
       racy already had a practice of deliberation for collective reflection on novelty, uncer-
       tainty and catastrophe. That practice was tragedy.    
         The article is structured as follows. After demonstrating why Jonas should be
       considered Jonas a thinker of the Anthropocene, we engage critically with Jonas’s
       account of the context of deliberation, ethical principles, and practices of delibera-
       tion, respectively, that are proper to the Anthropocene. Each of these three topics is
       addressed in its own section.                         
                                                             
       Table 1 Three sub-questions of Sub-questions Answers  
       the Anthropocene question                             
                       Context of deliberation (what makes The specific set of facts
                       the Anthropocene new?) about human action and the
                                        circumstances in which we
                                        act that shape what is an
                                        appropriate ethics   
                       Ethical principles (why should these Foundational normative
                       new features inform the ethics of the assumptions that form the
                       Anthropocene?)   basis for ethical deliberation
                                        about our responsibilities
                       Practices of deliberation (how Social practices of delibera-
                       should we act on the new principles tion that allow us to meet
                       set out in light of the new feature of our responsibilities
                       the Anthropocene?)                    
         In the section devoted to the context of deliberation proper to the Anthropocene,
       we critically evaluate Jonas’s view of what features make the Anthropocene a fun-
       damentally new era for ethics. We demonstrate that while Jonas is right to insist that
       an ethics for the Anthropocene needs to take profound novelty and uncertainty into
       account, due consideration of the historical context shows that Jonas is wrong to sug-
       gest that these features, which were characteristic of 5th-century B.C.E. Athens and
       have been closely related to the genre of tragedy, are new characteristics of contem-
       porary human action. Instead, Jonas’s most compelling account of what is new con-
       cerns the temporal extension and the magnitude of the effects of our actions, which
       make deliberation on their moral significance profoundly difficult.
         The following section turns to Jonas’s account of ethical principles to set out
       what new ethical demands Jonas takes these features of the context of deliberation
       to imply. That section studies Jonas’s famous principle of responsibility, self-con-
       sciously modeled on Kant’s categorical imperative: ‘Act so that the effects of your
       action are compatible with the permanence of genuine human life’ (Jonas, 1984, p.
       11). We emphasize its close similarity to the precautionary ethics that informs recent
       empirical work on the boundaries of the earth system (Rockström et al., 2009, 2023),
       and thereby further develop our critical reading of Jonas’s project to ground ethics in
       an answer to the Anthropocene question.               

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 5 of 21 32
                                                             
         In the final section, we turn to our agenda-setting and contemporary objectives by
       interpreting Jonas’s account of novel duties for how to deliberate. Jonas’s diagnosis
       of the ethical predicament of the Anthropocene brings into sharp focus the practical,
       rather than fundamentally ethical, obstacles toward deliberating on how to act in the
       face of human impact on the planet. Jonas believed that, confronted with these new
       challenges, democratic government would no longer be adequate, leading him to
       favor autocratic rule. Building on our arguments that novelty and uncertainty are not
       new but were characteristic of the 5th-century B.C.E. Athens where tragedy flour-
       ished, we explore the institution of Athenian tragedy as a set of practices that allow
       individuals to act on Jonas’s two principles in both a collective and a democratic way.
       Criticizing the view, expressed both by Jonas and more recent authors, that democ-
       racy is unfit for the Anthropocene, we show that tragedy embodies a sophisticated
       democratic practice of deliberating on novelty, uncertainty and catastrophe.
       Hans Jonas and the Anthropocene                       
                                                             
       Hans Jonas’s acute awareness of the novelty of human impact on the planet led to him
       to articulate and seek to answer the question of what, if anything, is new about the
       ethical demands that this impact places on human action. Although the current sense
       of the term ‘Anthropocene’ only entered circulation after his death, we will argue that
       Jonas can still be read as a theorist of the Anthropocene.
         Born in Germany in 1903, Jonas wrote his dissertation under the supervision of
       Martin Heidegger and alongside Hannah Arendt and Herbert Marcuse. Forced to
       flee the Nazis in 1933, his mother’s death in Auschwitz precipitated his break with
       Heidegger (Jonas, 2003). From 1955 onwards, Jonas taught at the New School for
       Social Research in New York City. Despite the deep scar that the Holocaust left on
       his life and the impact of the Cold War, Jonas’s ethical thinking identifies a new
       type of threat to humanity: the slow-moving exhaustion of the planet Earth. As he
       writes at the start of his The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of Ethics for the
       Technological Age, first published in German in 1979, the hardest ‘threat to counter’
       is one that is ‘slow, long-term, cumulative’, namely, ‘the peaceful and constructive
       use of worldwide technological power, a use in which all of us collaborate as captive
       beneficiaries through rising production, consumption, and sheer population growth-
       that poses threats much harder to counter’ (Jonas, 1984, p. ix). Not having any such
       term as 'Anthropocene' at his disposal, Jonas consistently describes our new era as
       the ‘technological age’.                              
         The idea of the Anthropocene reflects a major advance of 20th-century science,
       namely, to think of the earth itself as a complex system, one which can be shifted
       into a different state by human action (Rockström et al., 2009; Bonneuil & Fressoz,
       2017). If the effects of human action remain small, the earth system accommodates
       change and stays in the safe operating space associated with the Holocene. However,
       growing greenhouse gas emissions, nitrogen deposition, biodiversity loss, the intro-
       duction of novel entities and other major perturbations may push the earth out of
       its current state, permanently damaging the system’s ability to accommodate human
       life. Introduced by the atmospheric chemist Paul Crutzen in 2000, the concept com-
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 6 of 21                B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       bines the words anthropos (‘human being’) and kainos (‘recent, new’) to designate a
       new epoch after the Holocene, in which human civilization had played out until then
       (Crutzen, 2006). For Crutzen, that era ended in the early 1950s with the accelerated
       used of fossil fuel and artificial fertilizers. In subsequent work, he came to define the
       new era as one where ‘the human imprint on the global environment has now become
       so large and active that it rivals some of the great forces of Nature in its impact on the
       functioning of the Earth system’ (Crutzen, 2006).     
         Although the Imperative of Responsibility appeared only in 1979, it builds on
       Jonas’s lectures beginning from the 1950s, precisely when Crutzen identifies the start
       of the Anthropocene (Jonas, 1984, p. ix). Jonas’s ethics is motivated by a recognition
       that ‘[t]hresholds may be reached in one, direction or another, points of no return,
       where processes initiated by us will run away from us on their own momentum and
       toward disaster’ (Jonas, 1984, p. ix). Among other things, Jonas called attention spe-
       cifically to ‘the so-called green-house effect’, through which ‘the happy-go-lucky
       feast of a few industrial centuries could be paid for with millennia of altered terres-
       trial nature’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 190). These passages thus leave little doubt that Jonas’s
       concern is not merely the environmentalist’s worries about pollution, acid rain or
       radioactive waste, but rather a profound recognition that human life impacts the very
       conditions of life on the planet. It is for this reason that we feel comfortable charac-
       terizing Jonas as a thinker of the Anthropocene.      
         While Jonas thus identifies the novelty of the Anthropocene, his ethical interpre-
       tation of its novelty is not always easy to distil from his text; his views resist easy
       summary and are at times expressed in ways that have limited their academic recep-
       tion (Schmidt, 2013). These issues are nowhere as clear as in his account of classical
       antiquity, which we take to be at heart of his answer to the Anthropocene question. In
       critically assessing his views, our objective in the next section is to develop what we
       take to be the most promising version of Jonas’s answer.
       Context of deliberation                               
       What new facts about human action characterize today’s context of deliberation?
       Reflecting on the so-called ‘Ode to Man’ in Sophocles’ Antigone, Jonas characterizes
       the context of deliberation of the past as one where ‘the human condition, deter-
       mined by the nature of man and the nature of things, was given once for all’, where
       ‘the human good on that basis was readily determinable’, and where, accordingly,
       ‘the range of human action and therefore responsibility was narrowly circumscribed’
       (Jonas, 1984, p. 1).                                  
         Jonas at times thus suggests that human action in antiquity was not fundamen-
       tally new relative to previous ways of life; that its outcomes were typically well-
       understood and easy to predict; and that, accordingly, agents would typically know
       the normative significance of their actions. On this account, the distinctive features
       of the Anthropocene are therefore profound novelty and uncertainty. We argue that
       any ethics that is suitable for the Anthropocene should indeed take these features into
       account, but that appropriate consideration of scholarship on 5th-century Greece and
       Athenian tragedy makes clear that they are by no means new. Instead, Jonas’s more
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 7 of 21 32
                                                             
       promising account of today’s context of deliberation concerns the ways in which
       the temporal extension and the magnitude of the effects of our action hinder ethical
       deliberation.                                         
       Antiquity                                             
                                                             
       Jonas’s engagement with Greco-Roman antiquity centers around his reading of the
       so-called ‘Ode to Man’, the first choral stasimon of Sophocles’ Antigone. This cel-
       ebrated song explores the remarkable nature of the human, emphasizing in particular
       our mastery over the earth and the animal kingdom, as well as distinctively human
       skills and technologies such as speech, construction and medicine.1 The final stanza
       highlights the importance of law and religion, which define the boundaries of accept-
       able human behavior.                                  
         On Jonas’s reading, the ‘Ode to Man’ serves as the paradigm of what could be
       described in contemporary terms as a Holocene mindset: a point in history where
       human action is not seen to change nature fundamentally. In the Ode, Jonas sees a
       world where:                                          
         for all his boundless resourcefulness, man is still small by the measure of
         the elements … He cannot harm them by carving out his little kingdom from
         theirs. They last, while his schemes have their short-lived way. … All this holds
         because before our time man’s inroads into nature, as seen by himself, were
         essentially superficial and powerless to upset its appointed balance (Jonas,
         1984, p. 3).                                        
                                                             
       For Jonas, the 'Ode to Man' thus expresses a context of deliberation where human
       action cannot fundamentally change the extent to which the planet supports human
       life. In turn, this timelessness of basic planetary conditions informs Jonas’s observa-
       tion that at this time, knowledge about the human condition and the ethical criteria
       that applied to action were deemed to be essentially timeless:
         The good and evil about which action had to care lay close to the act, either
         in the praxis itself or in its immediate reach, and were not matters for remote
         planning … Proper conduct had its immediate criteria and almost immediate
         consummation … Ethics accordingly was of the here and now … The good
         man was the one who met these contingencies with virtue and wisdom, cultivat-
         ing these powers in himself, and for the rest resigning himself to the unknown
         (Jonas, 1984, pp. 4–5).                             
                                                             
       Because humanity’s predicament was unchanging and the planetary consequences of
       human action were relatively easily foreseen, deliberation depended essentially on
       cultivating individual moral excellence to meet the contingencies one faced.
                                                             
       1 Among the vast literature on the ‘Ode to Man’ see esp. Segal (1964), Segal (1981, pp. 152–206, esp. p.
       441 n.4). Billings (2021, pp. 172–184) provides an up-to-date bibliography.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 8 of 21                B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
         Jonas develops this discussion by advancing what we take to be three theses con-
       cerning the context of deliberation of the Anthropocene. The first concerns epistemic
       uncertainty: a new gap has opened up between our knowledge and our abilities. What
       is new to the Anthropocene, as Jonas puts it, is that ‘[k]nowledge… becomes a prime
       duty beyond anything claimed for it heretofore, and the knowledge must be com-
       mensurate with the causal scale of our action’ (Jonas,1984, p. 7). Elsewhere, Jonas
       puts it even more forcefully: ‘extrapolation from presently available data will always,
       in certainty and completeness of prediction, fall short of the causal pregnancy of our
       technological deeds’ (Jonas, 1984, p. x).             
         Jonas’s second thesis concerns normative uncertainty. Beyond a narrowly epis-
       temic uncertainty, Jonas also holds that what is distinctive about ethics in the ‘techno-
       logical age’ is that it has become more difficult to foresee the normative significance
       of our actions. That significance not only depends on empirical knowledge, but also
       on a conception of the ‘human condition’: the nature of human beings and the natural
       world in which they operate. Jonas begins his book with the following claims, which
       frame his presentation of the 'Ode to Man':           
         All previous ethics – whether in the form of issuing direct enjoinders to do and
         not to do certain things, or in the form of defining principles for such enjoin-
         ders, or in the form of establishing the ground of obligation for obeying such
         principles – had these interconnected tacit premises in common: that the human
         condition, determined by the nature of man and the nature of things, was given
         once for all; that the human good on that basis was readily determinable; and
         that the range of human action and therefore responsibility was narrowly cir-
         cumscribed (Jonas, 1984, p. 1).                     
       This in turn leads to a third thesis that lies behind the diagnosis of epistemic and
       normative uncertainty, the profound novelty of the ethical challenges of the Anthro-
       pocene. For Jonas, the most fundamental ethical challenge is that our actions are dif-
       ferent from those of our historical predecessors, which means that we can no longer
       rely on the past as a guide for proper conduct. While Jonas is certainly right that ‘the
       altered nature of human action…raises moral issues for which past ethics…has left
       us unprepared’ (Jonas, 1984, p. x), he sometimes also makes the stronger claim that
       in the past, ethical knowledge was held to be simple and that what constituted good
       action was timeless: ‘the best state, so it was thought, is also the best state for the
       future…since the criteria of a good order (of which durability is one) do not change’
       (Jonas, 1984, p. 15). The Anthropocene, Jonas argues, raises new ethical challenges
       because it confronts humanity with ethical questions for which the past contains no
       reliable answers: profound novelty leads to epistemic and normative uncertainty.
         Recent scholarship makes it hard to maintain Jonas’s claims concerning novelty.
       In fact, something like opposite was true: precisely this sense of profound novelty
       would have been familiar to Sophocles and others throughout the 5th-century B.C.E.
       – and had indeed begun to be perceptible even in the final third of the 6th-century
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 9 of 21 32
       B.C.E.2 As the status of the great authorities, the epic poets Homer and Hesiod, began
       to erode, new space opened up for a scramble of mythographers and historians, proph-
       ets and diviners, natural scientists and philosophers to stake their claims to knowl-
       edge and authority. The increasingly widespread adoption of writing began to have a
       profound impact on the way that knowledge, authority, and truth were conceptualized
       and asserted. A nascent tradition of what we would call natural science developed
       new theories about the workings of the natural world, replacing divine caprice with
       a universe governed by regular, intelligible principles; alongside this, a radical cri-
       tique of knowledge and a new interest in language revolutionized ideas about what
       could be known and correctly expressed. In Athens, a series of far-reaching reforms
       made political, judicial, and other institutions markedly more democratic;3 isonomia,
       equality before the law, and isēgoria, equality of political power, emerged as new
       political principles. Sophocles thus lived in a world characterized not by a ‘stable
       equilibrium’ but by deep and fundamental transformations which left few domains
       of Greek life unchanged. Indeed, the very text Jonas chooses, the 'Ode to Man', is
       itself often understood not only as an expression of ‘the changeable human condition’
       (Dunn, 2007, p. 157) but precisely as a product of debates about the normative sig-
       nificance of the profound novelty experienced by inhabitants of 5th-century B.C.E.
       Athens.                                               
         Moreover, according to a highly influential view, the genre of tragedy emerged as
       a response to exactly this profound novelty and the normative uncertainty that arose
       in its wake (Gould, 1983; Vernant, 1988a, b). On this view, the fact that old norms,
       old codes of behaviour, old conceptions about the legitimacy and nature of law and
       political power no longer had the same purchase – and are even in tension or indeed
       direct conflict with new understandings of these things – is intimately linked with
       tragic form; in the arc of its plots and in the rapid-fire one-line debates of stichomy-
       thia, tragedy serves as a site for exploring the relationship between old norms and
       new, and staging a confrontation between them (Vernant, 1988a, b; Goldhill, 2012,
       pp. 56–80). Here, too, it is ironic that Sophocles’ Antigone has served as the locus
       classicus for discussions of these topics (Hegel, 1975; Vernant, 1988a, b).
         A similar point may also be made regarding epistemic uncertainty. In an obvi-
       ous if perhaps superficial sense, tragedy is the genre that undermines par excellence
       the notion that human ‘knowledge [can] be commensurate with the causal scale of
       our action’; most if not all protagonists in extant 5th-century B.C.E. tragedies suf-
       fer precisely because the opposite is revealed to be true. Here, too, the 'Ode to Man'
       offers a surprising basis for Jonas’s claims: the apparently optimistic vision of human
       knowledge it offers is devastatingly undermined both by subsequent choral odes and
       by the remainder of the play (Linforth, 1961; Segal, 1981). Moreover, the themes and
       qualities foregrounded in the 'Ode to Man' have been widely seen to be embodied in
       the protagonist of Sophocles’ subsequent play Oedipus Tyrannus, a play often read
       2 For the following paragraph, see esp. Buxton (1999), Lloyd (1979, 1987), Osborne (1997, 2018), Folit-
       Weinberg (2022, 65–112) for further bibliography.     
       3 Though just when and how is a matter of dispute; for a useful overview of debates and a meta-historiog-
       raphy with bibliography, see Osborne (2006).          
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 10 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       as the paradigmatic drama of epistemic failure (Knox, 1957; Buxton, 1980; Segal,
       1981; Goldhill, 1986).                                
       Magnitude of effects and scale                        
                                                             
       Contrary to Jonas’s arguments, then, profound novelty, epistemic and normative
       uncertainty are by no means unique to the Anthropocene; because they are also char-
       acteristic features of the very 5th-century B.C.E. Athens that produced the ‘Ode to
       Man’, they cannot offer a satisfactory basis for answering the Anthropocene ques-
       tion. This is not to say, however, that Jonas is wrong to identify them as constitutive
       features of the context of deliberation characteristic of the Anthropocene. The crucial
       role of novelty and uncertainty in determining today’s context of deliberation comes
       into view when we consider two further changes stressed by Jonas, which concern
       the magnitude of the effects and temporal extension of action made possible by 20th-
       century technology.                                   
         For Jonas, ‘technology’ appears as a shorthand for a range of new ways that human
       capacities are expanded through industrialization, capitalism, fossil fuels, modern
       agriculture, and other similar developments. It is because of these extensions of
       human agency that our actions have come to affect the earth system in ways that
       potentially undermine the very ability of humans to live there: ‘No previous ethics
       had to consider the global condition of human life and the far-off future, even exis-
       tence, of the race’ (Jonas, 1984, pp. 7–8).           
         Because technology makes it possible that human action affects the conditions of
       life on the planet itself, humanity acquires new ethical responsibilities: ‘the nature
       of human action has de facto changed, and … an object of an entirely new order
       — no less than the whole biosphere of the planet – has been added to what we must
       be responsible for because of our power over it’ (Jonas, 1984, p.7). The changed
       nature of human action, not changes to the earth system per se (Hamilton, 2016;
       Chakraborty, 2024), gives rise to new ethical challenges and new kinds of uncertainty
       concerning what we ought to do.                       
         Jonas claims that these new responsibilities require a fundamental rethinking of
       ethics. Jonas also identifies several ways that the novelty and uncertainty specific to
       the Anthropocene hinder us from meeting our ethical responsibilities. Many of these
       result from extended spatial and temporal scale: whereas in the past there was an
       immediacy between undertaking an action and seeing its consequences, the nature of
       climate change displaces the consequences of our actions into the future, sometimes
       the quite-distant future. As a result, potentially catastrophic but distant outcomes
       often escape our attention (cf. Gardiner, 2011). Moreover, reversing their ‘biogeo-
       physical impact’ (Wallenhorst, 2023) may only be possible on a millennial timescale.
       As we saw, Jonas observes that, unlike ‘past ethics, geared to the direct dealings of
       man with his fellowmen within narrow horizons of space and time’ (Jonas, 1984, p.
       ix), today’s ethics involves responsibilities to people we do not know and who may
       not yet have been born. In addition, Jonas emphasizes that ‘that which is to be feared
       has never yet happened and has perhaps no analogies in past or present experience’
       (Jonas, 1984, p. 28). Finally, in contrast to a nuclear war, human impact on the planet
       takes shape through the incremental effects of many individually actions. This cumu-

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 11 of 21 32
                                                             
       lative impact of individual actions is discontinuous, meaning that for long periods
       of time the impact of these actions can build up until we reach ‘points of no return,
       where processes initiated by us will run away from us on their own momentum and
       toward disaster’ (Jonas, 1984, p. ix).                
         New technologies, and obstacles to meeting the responsibilities they impose on us,
       combine to form a novel and profoundly challenging context of deliberation. These
       factors thus provide a starting point for answering the Anthropocene question; they
       are not yet an answer to the question of what moral requirements are fundamen-
       tally new – that is, they provide only a part of Jonas’s answer to the Anthropocene
       question.                                             
                                                             
       Ethical principles                                    
       We now turn to the second part of Jonas's answer, which takes the form of a new
       foundational moral principle, the principle of responsibility. In its most pithy formu-
       lation, it requires that one: ‘[a]ct so that the effects of your action are compatible with
       the permanence of genuine human life’, or, alternatively, ‘[a]ct so that the effects of
       your action are not destructive of the future possibility of such life’ (Jonas, 1984, p.
       11). Reading Jonas in light of his project of answering the Anthropocene question
       helps clarify the exact content of the principle, which has been subject to a range of
       interpretations (Whiteside, 2006; Schmidt, 2013; Coyne, 2020).
         Jonas’s principle of responsibility is typically interpreted as a precautionary prin-
       ciple, which demands that human action should be geared toward avoiding a specific
       catastrophic outcome (Sandin et al., 2002; Gardiner, 2006; Steel, 2018). Rather than
       pursuing outcomes that are optimal in some regard (justice, for example), precau-
       tionary action aims to avoid catastrophically bad outcomes. As the philosophical
       literature on precautionary principles makes clear, however, the intuitive idea of pre-
       caution requires considerable clarification. For one thing, there is not one ‘precau-
       tionary principle’, but rather a family of distinct ethical principles. Moreover, some
       principles of precaution are indeed irrational, assigning undue weight to potential
       threats or leading to paralysis potentially prohibiting any action that can be expected
       to have bad outcomes (Sunstein, 2005). By specifying its content appropriately, how-
       ever, a precautionary principle can be tailored to a specific context of deliberation to
       pre-empt irrational and paralysing prescriptions.     
         A well-specified principle has the following four-fold structure: ‘If there is (i) a
       threat, which is (ii) uncertain, then (iii) some kind of action to avert it (iv) is the cor-
       rect course of action’ (Sandin et al., 2002). Each of the elements (i)-(iv) needs elabo-
       ration for a precautionary principle to be action-guiding: (i) What kind of threat does
       it apply to? (ii) What level of evidence is required that the threat might occur? (iii)
       What action should take place? And (iv) What is the deontic status of its requirement?
       By specifying (i) and (ii), we can avoid irrationality and paralysis; the threat should
       be sufficiently large to warrant action, and the degree of evidence required should
       be subject to a minimum threshold. By specifying (iii) and (iv), we can ensure that
       the deontic requirements of any given principle are proportionate to the outcomes at
       stake.                                                
                                                             

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 12 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
         Accordingly, we should ask: What is the precise content of Jonas’s precautionary
       principle, if indeed he articulates one? Some of Jonas’s formulations risk assign-
       ing an irrationally high weight to specific threats. The principle’s simplest statement
       asserts that ‘the prophecy of doom is to be given greater heed than the prophecy of
       bliss’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 31). As he formulates his main insight in the Preface to the
       English edition of The Ethics of Responsibility:      
         [A]n imaginative ‘heuristics of fear’, replacing the former projections of hope,
         must tell us what is possibly at stake and what we must beware of. The mag-
         nitude of those stakes, taken together with the insufficiency of our predictive
         knowledge, leads to the pragmatic rule to give the prophecy of doom priority
         over the prophecy of bliss (Jonas, 1984, p x).      
                                                             
       It is hard to find a well-defined class of actions in such formulations. Instead, Jonas’s
       statement pertains to all actions that could have negative consequences for the quality
       of life of future generations, implying paralysis.    
         Jonas invokes a clear notion of precaution when he argues that ‘[n]ever must the
       existence or the essence of man as a whole be made a stake in the hazards of action’
       (Jonas, 1984, p. 37). This statement and others like it suggest the following strict
       principle: If (i) an action has human extinction (ii) as a possible outcome, then (iii)
       abstaining from that action is (iv) required. Recent commentators have typically
       zeroed in on this interpretation of Jonas’s principle as it offsets concerns about irra-
       tionality: human extinction would be catastrophic, and avoiding any action that could
       have that outcome makes intuitive sense (Whiteside, 2006, pp. 195–208; Coyne,
       2020, pp. 149–152). It also offers a clear response to concerns about indeterminacy
       and paralysis: we have a good idea what actions could lead to human extinction (Liu
       et al., 2018).                                        
         Reduced to this strict formulation, however, Jonas’s principle of responsibility
       fails to meet his ambition of setting out a new ethics for the Anthropocene. Human
       extinction is unlikely to result from gradual environmental degradation.4 If we apply
       this standard, a high level of CO emissions could go together with adaptation, result-
                         2                                   
       ing in a largely unlivable planet, but not the extinction Jonas fears. Unlike what he
       suggests, it may be true that ‘the dangers which threaten the quality of future life are
       in general the same as those which, magnified, threaten survival itself’, but it does
       not follow from this that ‘avoiding the ones is a fortiori avoiding the others’ (Jonas,
       1984, p. 40). Because actions that really threaten human extinction are quite rare, the
       strict precautionary principle has a limited application. Notably, Jonas rules out such
       a narrow interpretation when he writes that his ethics is meant to cover the ‘slow,
       long-term, cumulative … use of worldwide technological power’, which he takes to
       be more dangerous and central to his project than ‘the insanity of a sudden, suicidal
       atomic holocaust, which sane fear can avoid with relative ease’ (Jonas, 1984, p. ix, cf.
       p. 202). Accordingly, when it comes to catastrophic outcomes, we must distinguish
       those actions that result in human extinction from those that permanently decrease
       the quality of human life.                            
       4 See e.g. Kemp et al. (2022) on catastrophic scenarios associated with climate change.

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 13 of 21 32
                                                             
         For Jonas’s principle genuinely to claim to answer the Anthropocene question, it
       should cover the entire scope of the new ethical demands placed on human action.
       Such a formulation would prohibit not only those actions which threaten human sur-
       vival itself but also those that threaten the quality of future life on the planet. A
       broader reading of the principle of responsibility has considerable textual support in
       Jonas’s claims that our actions should be compatible with ‘the permanence of genu-
       ine human life’. This formulation suggests that we should interpret Jonas’s principle
       of responsibility as requiring that: (i) If an action has permanently reducing the abil-
       ity of the planet to sustain human life (ii) as a possible outcome, then (iii) abstaining
       from that action is (iv) required. Today’s earth system sciences provide an upper and
       lower boundary estimate of threshold values for the earth system (for example, atmo-
       spheric CO concentration) beyond which the ability of the planet to support human
             2                                               
       life can be permanently damaged (Rockström et al., 2009, 2023). Such ‘planetary
       boundaries’ or ‘safe earth systems boundaries’ specify that class of actions more pre-
       cisely: Acting in accordance with the permanence of genuine human life requires not
       crossing planetary boundaries.                        
         Specified in this way, Jonas’s precautionary principle could be thought to provide
       the most basic principle for ethical deliberation in the Anthropocene. Its prescription
       of avoiding a grave harm irrespective of its probability of occurrence is an apt start-
       ing point for a context of deliberation characterized by great novelty and uncertainty
       (where, by definition, no probabilities can be attributed to catastrophic outcomes).
       There are, of course, further questions this principle raises. More fundamentally,
       one may ask whether ethical principles are of any use at all in a context of ethical
       deliberation marked by a high degree of epistemic uncertainty (Vallor, 2016, 2024).
       Clearly, Jonas’s precautionary ethics is just one among other legitimate possibili-
       ties. Importantly, however, the principle’s focus on damage to the conditions of life
       for future generations responds directly to the features of the Anthropocene that are
       genuinely novel. Accordingly, the principle of responsibility articulates an actionable
       and, crucially, new ethical demand; by doing so, it provides a crucial starting point
       for Jonas’s answer to the Anthropocene question.      
       Practices of deliberation                             
       While the principle of responsibility characterizes a fundamental new ethical demand,
       it is only one part of Jonas’s answer to the Anthropocene question. In fact, Jonas’s
       emphasis on new individual and collective practices of deliberation, points that are
       not often acknowledged, represents his most important agenda-setting contribution
       to contemporary normative theory. Jonas identifies two new duties for how to delib-
       erate: first, a duty to have an imaginative encounter with catastrophe, and second, a
       duty to summon the emotions appropriate to such a catastrophe, especially fear. By
       showing that Jonas wrongly infers from these duties the superiority of an authori-
       tarian political system, we also contribute to recent debates over the Anthropocene
       and the legitimacy of democratic governance. Building on our discussion in 'Context
       of Deliberation' above, we show that 5th-century Athenian tragedy, and especially
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 14 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       Sophocles, provides a model for how to fulfill Jonas’s two duties without abandoning
       democracy.                                            
       An authoritarian Anthropocene?                        
                                                             
       The principle of responsibility appears in Chapter One of the Imperative of Responsi-
       bility. After introducing it, Jonas also considers how to act on humanity’s new moral
       duties and how to find out how to act on it. Since our moral obligation is to ensure
       that catastrophic human impact does not happen, he argues, we need new practices to
       overcome new and profound obstacles to deliberation.  
         The core of Jonas’s view on how to deliberate consists in two duties of delibera-
       tion. The first he refers to under the rubric of ‘[v]isualizing the long-range effects
       of technological enterprise’. In fact, this amounts to a duty of imagination: since
       the catastrophic risks we face are now fundamentally different to those of the past,
       we cannot rely on our experience of past catastrophes by must instead ‘creatively
       imagine’ the catastrophes proper to the Anthropocene (Jonas, 1984, p. 27). Because
       our imagining these catastrophes will not ‘arise on its own’, Jonas argues, they must
       therefore be ‘intentionally induced’ (1984, p. 27). To this end, he expresses hope in
       ‘the infant science of ecology’, which on his view should include not only the natural
       scientist who studies the physical impact of human action on nature, but also ‘the
       economist and engineer, the city planner and transportation specialist, and so forth’
       (Jonas, 1984, p. 185).                                
         The second duty, which follows closely from the first, is an affective or emotional
       duty; Jonas describes it under the rubric of ‘[s]ummoning up a feeling appropriate
       to what has been visualized’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 28). Jonas’s core insight – amply borne
       out in the intervening decades – responds to the points observed above, namely, that
       the specific risks of the Anthropocene are too distant in time and causal proximity
       to our actions, too vast in scale, and too abstract to inspire or motivate us to act with
       the same urgency that traditional threats do. As a result, we need to undertake extra
       measures to condition ourselves emotionally so that we act with the same urgency as
       we would in situations where the consequences of our own actions are immediately
       visible and affect us directly. This requires ‘purposely making room…in our disposi-
       tion’ for the emotions summoned by what we imagine. This in turn creates the need
       for a ‘deliberate attitude’ that ‘must be cultivated; we must educate our soul to a will-
       ingness to let itself be affected’ by catastrophes in the future. That is:
         bringing ourselves to this emotional readiness, developing an attitude open to
         the stirrings of fear in the face of merely conjectural and distant forecasts con-
         cerning man’s destiny – a new kind of éducation sentimentale – is the second,
         preliminary duty of the ethic we are seeking…we are obliged to lay ourselves
         open to the appropriate fear (Jonas, 1984, p. 28).  
       On Jonas’s view, then, generating the will to act in accordance with the principle of
       responsibility requires first, having an imaginative encounter with catastrophe, and
       then second, allowing, indeed conditioning, ourselves to feel the sense of fear appro-
       priate to what we have imagined; it is this emotional force which will impel us to act.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 15 of 21 32
                                                             
       Only by adhering to these principles can we ensure ‘our highest duty’, namely, ‘to see
       that responsibility itself is not stifled’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 107).
         Reflecting on what would be required to act on these duties, Jonas’s account turns
       notoriously bleak.5 In an infamous section titled ‘The advantage of total govern-
       mental power’, Jonas enumerates ‘the advantages of autocracy as such’, suggesting
       that an authoritarian state such as the Soviet Union is better equipped to meet the
       challenges of the Anthropocene because ‘decisions from the top, which can be made
       without prior assent from below, meet with no resistance (except perhaps passive)
       in the social body and, given a reasonable dependability of the lower echelons, are
       assured of implementation’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 146). Turning to Plato, Jonas is tempted
       by autocratic deception concerning the true costs of environmental action: ‘Perhaps
       this dangerous game of mass deception (Plato’s ‘noble lie’) is all that politics will
       eventually have to offer: to give effect to the principle of fear under the mask of the
       principle of hope’ (Jonas, 1984, p. 149).             
         As unattractive as Jonas’s authoritarian turn may seem, some aspects of his rea-
       soning are difficult to contest. In Jonas’s view, in addition to lacking the benefit of
       ‘total government power’, democratic governance suffers from the disadvantage of
       incentivizing short-term modes of thinking (Jonas, 1992, pp. 99–101). Capitalism,
       meanwhile, operates on the basis of profit-motives, which Jonas thinks are unlikely
       to respond adequately to the risks of the Anthropocene (Jonas, 1984, pp.145–146).
       Merely to reject Jonas’s pessimistic conclusion is thus to fail to take sufficiently seri-
       ously the momentous challenge to liberal democracy that emanates from the Anthro-
       pocene (cf. Mittiga, 2021).                           
       Tragedy as a democratic alternative                   
       So is there a way that we can navigate novelty and uncertainty in the face of planetary
       boundaries within a democratic system? We think that the observations made above
       offer the basis for a more optimistic outlook. As we saw, the 5th-century B.C.E. was
       a time when profound novelty engendered epistemic and normative uncertainty in
       Athens, and the institution of tragedy is often seen as a means of responding to these
       features, especially normative uncertainty. In what follows, we explore how tragedy
       also offered a distinctively democratic framework within which Jonas’s two duties
       regarding the practices of deliberation could be met.6
         In fact, nearly all critical discussions of tragedy focus on features central to Jonas’s
       two duties. Drama has long been seen to hold a specially privileged grip on the imagi-
       nation of the spectator insofar as it is the medium that most powerfully presents
       human action before the eyes of the viewer (the word ‘theater’ means ‘a place for
       viewing/seeing/beholding’). Where other forms of artistic representation such as epic
       5 On Jonas’s authoritarianism, see especially Wolin (2001, pp. 120–129), Whiteside (2006, pp. 95–101),
       and Coyne (2020, pp. 145–172). However, not all readers of Jonas’s last interview in Der Spiegel (1992)
       are likely to conclude that he favors a ‘dictatorship of the saviors of humanity’ (Wolin, 2001, p. 128). For
       a more favorable interpretation, Dineen (2014).       
       6 For another return to 5th -century B.C.E. Athens in the service of finding unexpected ways to solve the
       problems of the Anthropocene – with a similar interest in institutions and practices of deliberation – see
       also Schlosser (2020).                                
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 16 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       poetry use words sung by a poet to stimulate the imagination of the audience, drama,
       the performance of human action onstage, quite literally places the imagined world
       of the story before the eyes of the audience; it is one thing to hear about Oedipus
       blinding himself, and entirely something else to see someone dressed as Oedipus
       appear before you with a gory depiction of bloodied eye-sockets.7 Drama is thus
       the quintessential medium, and the theater the quintessential site, where immedi-
       ate, vivid imaginative encounters occur. What is more, tragedy is the form of drama
       where catastrophes, rather than other kinds of action, are presented. Attending tragic
       drama in the theater – attending the representation of imagined catastrophes in the
       place of seeing and beholding – thus fulfills in exemplary fashion the deliberative
       practice of having an imagined encounter with catastrophe.
         A similar point might be made with respect to the power of tragedy to produce
       emotions, especially pity and fear, which has always been seen as one of its most
       fundamental features. An episode recounted by Herodotus, a contemporary of Sopho-
       cles, illustrates the point vividly. When an early tragedian depicted an event from the
       recent historical (rather than distant mythical) past, the sack of the city of Miletus, the
       entire theater ‘burst into tears’ (Hdt. 6.21), and a huge fine was levied against him for
       presenting a catastrophe that touched the Athenians, close allies of the Milesians, too
       personally. Since the 5th-century B.C.E., the emotion of fear has also been identified
       alongside pity as the other characteristic emotion of tragedy (Halliwell, 2011; Munte-
       anu, 2011, pp. 37–51); in The Republic, Socrates identifies its capacity to generate
       emotions as ‘the most serious accusation’ against mimetic poetry such as drama (Pl.
       Rep. 10.605c–606d), while Aristotle’s celebrated definition of tragedy in the Poetics
       accords emotions a constitutive role in tragedy insofar as tragedy ‘accomplishes,
       through pity and fear, the katharsis of such emotions’ (Arist. Poet. 1449b27–28).8
         Tragedy, understood as a part of a practice of deliberation, is inextricably con-
       nected to Athenian democracy in two ways. The first concerns tragedy’s profoundly
       communal, civic nature. Jonas’s discussion of imagination and emotions makes no
       mention of whether the deliberative practices he prescribes are to be undertaken as
       personal experiences or something else. But 5th-century B.C.E. tragedy was a com-
       munal experience that occurred in a public space: spectators sat in the Theater of Dio-
       nysus alongside roughly 15,000 attendees, the largest gathering of Athenian citizens
       on the calendar. Moreover, the Great Dionysia, the state-sponsored festival when
       tragedies were performed, was a distinctly civic affair. The seating arrangements
       within the theater seem to have constructed a map of the Athenian citizen body, and
       citizens were likely seated by ‘tribe’ (which determined political, military, and other
       civic service), thereby displaying the city as a city to and for itself (Winkler, 1990;
       Goldhill, 1997). Several rituals performed before the tragedies created an expressly
       civic frame; these included a rare gathering of Athens’ top political leaders to perform
       libations, and, very likely, high-profile recognition of citizens who had undertaken
       special deeds on behalf of the city. These rituals thus framed the ensuing explo-
       7 This is, of course, a rough summary of the distinction between mimesis and diegesis; for the relationship
       between mimesis, drama, and imagination in Plato, see esp. Grethlein (2020), Halliwell (1995, 2002, pp.
       72–97) and Woodruff (2008).                           
       8 For further discussion, see e.g. Rorty (1992), Nussbaum (2001) and Munteanu (2011, pp. 238–250).

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 17 of 21 32
                                                             
       ration, fundamental to so many tragedies, of how the collective of the democratic
       polis should incorporate individuals who embody norms and values of an earlier time
       (Seaford, 1994; Goldhill, 2000) – of how, that is, the democratic city should respond
       to profound normative uncertainty and change. The institution of 5th-century B.C.E.
       Athenian tragedy thus appears to have been specially organized to emphasize that
       citizens attended tragedies as citizens, and watched and responded emotionally to the
       encounter with catastrophe alongside their fellow citizens.
         The second point concerns the relationship between tragedy and democratic Ath-
       ens’ chief political institutions, the Assembly, where citizens spoke and voted for
       motions, and the Law Court, where citizens served on juries. Scholars have detailed
       pervasive similarities between the assembly, the law court, and the theater, especially
       their shared atmosphere of agonistic debate and the way all three construct the demo-
       cratic citizen as ‘a listening voting member of a collective audience’, (Goldhill, 2012,
       p. 38). Not for nothing did Plato coin the term ‘theatrocracy’ (Pl. Laws 701b).9
         Sophocles’ penchant for staging audienceship underscores this point further. The
       plays of Sophocles are distinctive for the frequency with which a third character
       (whose invention is often attributed to Sophocles) watches silently as two other char-
       acters converse, debate, or lament (Easterling, 1997; Goldhill, 2012, pp. 39–55), as if
       putting the audience on stage. This has a double effect. On the one hand, these scenes
       force the audience in the theatre to confront its own processes of observing, deliberat-
       ing on, and acting in response to what it sees, encouraging critical self-reflection by
       holding a mirror to the nature of spectatorship as such. On the other, it implies that the
       audience, too, is always potentially subject to the same tragedies that befall the char-
       acters on stage who fail to deliberate and act correctly (Goldhill, 2012, pp. 11–38,
       39–55). In view of the role of the democratic citizen as a spectator of speeches, a
       voter in the assembly, and a juror in the law court, Sophoclean tragedy may thus be
       seen as a format for developing an essential skill-set of the democratic citizen. By
       seeing how others see, respond emotionally to, deliberate upon, and ultimately act in
       response to the suffering and catastrophes of others, the audience gains experience
       in seeing, responding emotionally, deliberating, and acting in sophisticated, critically
       self-aware and self-reflexive ways: the actor acts and suffers onstage so that the audi-
       ence may learn to act differently in the great civic deliberations they undertake in
       real life.                                            
       Conclusion                                            
       In this article, we have sought to the answer the Anthropocene question: what, if
       anything, is new about the ethical demands that the Anthropocene places on human
       action. Our strategy relied on a critical reading of Hans Jonas’s Imperative of Respon-
       sibility from the perspective of contemporary classical scholarship, showing how
       normative insight into the Anthropocene requires historicism, but also how this his-
                                                             
       9 Plato’s critique of tragedy’s ability to play a positive normative role in a democratic context is brought
       to the fore most recently in (Balot, 2024). Plato’s critique, and Balot’s reading of it, highlights the signifi-
       cance of much deeper assumptions about human psychology in shaping aspects of this question.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 18 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
                                                             
       toricism can generate fundamental normative claims. Criticizing Jonas’s claim that
       the 20th-century raises profoundly new ethical challenges as a result of its novelty
       and uncertainty, the absence of which he wrongly diagnoses in Sophocles’ Antigone,
       we argued that the distinctiveness of the Anthropocene should instead be situated
       in the temporal and spatial extension of human action, which creates a new duty
       to avoid permanent damage to the ability of the planet to support human life. Hav-
       ing thus clarified what genuinely new facts about human action characterize today’s
       context of deliberation, we examined what new ethical principles these facts imply,
       focusing on Jonas’s principle of responsibility; we interpreted Jonas’s principle of
       responsibility as requiring that we abstain from actions that threaten the quality of
       future life on the planet, a principle we interpreted as a type of precautionary princi-
       ple closely aligned with 21st-century conceptions of planetary boundaries. Following
       Jonas, however, and in light of his fears about inaction in the face of environmental
       degradation, we turned to his account of the practices of deliberation required to
       act on the principle, settling on the importance of a duty to have an imaginative
       encounter with catastrophe, and a duty to summon the emotions appropriate to this
       encounter. We rejected Jonas’s claim, however, that such duties require giving up on
       democracy; observing that 5th-century B.C.E. Athenian tragedy was itself a response
       to profound novelty and epistemic and normative uncertainty, we observed how the
       institution of 5th-century B.C.E. Athenian tragedy meet Jonas’s two duties of delib-
       eration within a civic, democratic frame – and does so remarkably well.
         This final point is worth reflecting on. Today, movies such as ‘Don’t Look Up’ and
       novels such as Kim Stanley Robinson’s The Ministry for the Future might be thought
       to offer similarly vivid encounters with catastrophe. There is a crucial difference,
       however, between watching such a movie at home (or even in the cinema) and watch-
       ing it within the frame of the democratic institutions of 5th-century B.C.E. Athens
       – not to mention the level of the human species (Dryzek & Pickering, 2019). This
       gap shows us what it is we lack today – and leads the way toward thinking about how
       we can find a new and comparable set of deliberative practices in the 21st-century.
       Acknowledgements We wish to thank Emma Cole, Lewis Coyne, Harriet Fertik, Simon Goldhill,
       Thomas Hale, Adam Hawkes, Tom Hawkins, Marco Meyer, Pantelis Michelakis, Dana Munteanu, Ellen
       O’Gorman, Robin Osborne, Christopher Otter, Enzo Rossi, and Justus Schollmeyer for helpful discussions
       or comments on earlier versions of this article.      
       Declarations                                          
       Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
       is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n
       s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / .                               
                                                             

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 19 of 21 32
       References                                            
                                                             
       Balot, R. K. (2024). Tragedy, Philosophy, and Political Education in Plato’s Laws. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Bargués, P., Chandler, D., Schindler, S., & Waldow, V. (2024). Hope after ‘the end of the world’: Rethink-
         ing critique in the Anthropocene. Contemporary Political Theory, 23, 187–204.
       Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things. Duke University Press.
       Billings, J. (2021). The Philosophical Stage: Drama and Dialectic in Classical Athens. Princeton Univer-
         sity Press.                                         
       Blumenfeld, J. (2023). Climate barbarism: Adapting to a wrong world. Constellations, 30, 162–178.
       Bonneuil, C., & Fressoz, J.-B. (2017). The Shock of the Anthropocene: The Earth, History and Us. Trans.
         David Fernbach. Verso Books.                        
       Buxton, R. G. A. (1980). Blindness and limits: Sophokles and the logic of myth. Journal of Hellenic Stud-
         ies, 100, 22–37.                                    
       Buxton, R. G. A. (Ed.). (1999). From Myth to Reason? Studies in the Development of Greek Thought.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Caney, S. (2021). Climate Justice. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Winter.
         Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. h t t p s : / / p l a t o . s t a n f o r d . e d u / a r c h i v e s / w i n 2 0 2 1 / e n t r i e s
         / j u s t i c e - c l i m a t e /                   
       Chakrabarty, D. (2009). The climate of history: Four theses. Critical Inquiry, 35(2), 197–222.
       Chakraborty, A. (2024). Rethinking the Anthropocene: Not a time-transgressive event but a sudden rupture
         on the geologic time scale. Anthropocene, 48(December), Article 100454.
       Charbonnier, P. (2021). Affluence and Freedom: An Environmental History of Political Ideas. Trans.
         Andrew Brown. Polity.                               
       Coyne, L. (2020). Hans Jonas: Life, Technology and the Horizons of Responsibility. Bloomsbury.
       Cripps, E. (2013). Climate Change and the Moral Agent: Individual Duties in an Interdependent World.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Crutzen, P. J. (2006). The ‘Anthropocene’. Earth System Science in the Anthropocene. (Eds.) Eckart Ehlers
         and Thomas Krafft. Springer.                        
       Der Spiegel. 1992. “Dem bösen Ende näher,” May 10, 1992, sec. Politik h t t p s : / / w w w . s p i e g e l . d e / p o l i t i k / d
         em - b o e s e n - e n d e - n a e h e r - a - e 2 9 9 7 c 8 f - 0 0 0 2 - 0 0 0 1 - 0 0 0 0 - 0 0 0 0 1 3 6 8 0 5 3 5
       Dinneen, N. (2014). Hans Jonas’s noble ‘Heuristics of fear’: Neither the good lie nor the terrible truth.
         Cosmos and History: The Journal of Natural and Social Philosophy, 10, 2.
       Dryzek, J. S., & Pickering, J. (2019). The Politics of the Anthropocene. Oxford University Press.
       Dunn, F. M. (2007). Present Shock in Late Fifth-Century Greece. The University of Michigan Press.
       Easterling, P. E. (1997). Form and Performance. In P. E. Easterling (Ed.), The Cambridge Companion to
         Greek Tragedy. Cambridge University Press.          
       Folit-Weinberg, B. (2022). Homer, Parmenides, and the Road to Demonstration. Cambridge University
         Press.                                              
       Fritsch, M. (2023). Climate change and democracy. In G. Pellegrino & M. Di Paola (Eds.), Handbook of
         the philosophy of climate change. Springer.         
       Gardiner, S. (2006). A core precautionary principle. Journal of Political Philosophy, 14, 33–60.
       Gardiner, S. (2011). A Perfect Moral Storm: The Ethical Tragedy of Climate Change. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Gardiner, S., Caney, S., Jamieson, D., & Shue, H. (2010). Climate Ethics: Essential Readings. Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Ghosh, A. (2017). The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable. University of Chicago
         Press.                                              
       Goldhill, S. (1986). Reading Greek Tragedy. Cambridge University Press.
       Goldhill, S. (1997). The audience of Athenian tragedy. In P. E. Easterling (Ed.), The Cambridge compan-
         ion to Greek tragedy. Cambridge University Press.   
       Goldhill, S. (2000). Civic ideology and the problem of difference: The politics of aeschylean tragedy, once
         again. Journal of Hellenic Studies, 120, 34–56.     
       Goldhill, S. (2012). Sophocles and the Language of Tragedy. Oxford University Press.
       Gosseries, A., & González-Ricoy, I. (2016). Institutions for Future Generations. Oxford University Press.
       Gould, J. (1983). Homeric epic and the tragic moment. In T. Winnifrith (Ed.), Aspects of the epic. Penelope
         Murray, and K. W. Grandsden. Macmillan. pp: 32-45.  

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        32 Page 20 of 21               B. Folit-Weinberg, J. van ’t Klooster
       Grethlein, J. (2020). Plato in therapy: A cognitivist reassessment of the Republic ’s idea of Mimesis. The
         Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 78, 157–70.
       Halliwell, S. (1995). Plato, imagination and romanticism. In Ayres (Ed.), The passionate intellect: Essays
         on the transformation of classical traditions presented to I. G. Kidd. Routledge.
       Halliwell, S. (2002). The Aesthetics of Mimesis: Ancient Texts and Modern Problems. Princeton University
         Press.                                              
       Halliwell, S. (2011). Between Ecstasy and Truth: Interpretations of Greek Poetics from Homer to Longi-
         nus. Oxford University Press.                       
       Hamilton, C. (2016). The anthropocene as rupture. The Anthropocene Review, 3, 93–106.
       Hamilton, C., Bonneuil, C., & Gemenne, F. (Eds.). (2015). The Anthropocene and the Global Environ-
         mental Crisis. Routledge.                           
       Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Experimental Futures.
         Duke University Press.                              
       Hegel, G. W. F. (1975). Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art Volume I. Trans. T. M. Knox. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Hickey, C. (2021). Climate change, distributive justice, and ‘Pre-Institutional’ limits on resource appro-
         priation. European Journal of Philosophy, 29, 215–235.
       Jonas, H. (1984). The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics for the Technological Age.
         University of Chicago Press.                        
       Jonas, H. (2003). Erinnerungen. Insel.                
       Kelly, D. (2019). Politics and the Anthropocene. Polity.
       L. Kemp, C. Xu, J. Depledge, K.L. Ebi, G. Gibbins, T.A. Kohler, J. Rockström, M. Scheffer, H.J. Schelln-
         huber, W. Steffen, & T.M. Lenton, Climate Endgame: Exploring catastrophic climate change sce-
         narios, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119 (34) e2108146119, (2022)
       Knox, B. (1957). Oedipus at Thebes: Sophocles’ Tragic Hero and His Time. Yale University Press.
       Latour, B. (2017). Facing Gaia: Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime. Trans. Catherine Porter.
         Polity.                                             
       Linforth, I. M. (1961). Antigone and Creon. University of California Publications in Classical Philology,
         15, 183–260.                                        
       Liu, H. Y., & Lauta, K. C., and Matthijs Michiel Maas (2018). Governing boring apocalypses: A new
         typology of existential vulnerabilities and exposures for existential risk research. Futures, 102(Sep-
         tember), 6–19. Futures of research in catastrophic and existential risk.
       Lloyd, G. E. R. (1979). Magic, Reason, and Experience: Studies in the Origin and Development of Greek
         Science. Cambridge University Press.                
       Lloyd, G. E. R. (1987). The Revolutions of Wisdom: Studies in the Claims and Practice of Ancient Greek
         Science. University of California Press.            
       Malm, A., & Hornborg, A. (2014). The geology of mankind? A critique of the anthropocene narrative. The
         Anthropocene Review, 1, 62–69.                      
       Mittiga, R. (2021). Political legitimacy, authoritarianism, and climate change. American Political Science
         Review, December 6, 1–14.                           
       Moellendorf, D. (2012). Climate change and global justice. WIREs Climate Change, 3, 131–143.
       Morton, T. (2013). Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World (1st edition). Uni-
         versity of Minnesota Press.                         
       Munteanu, D. L. (2011). Tragic Pathos Pity and Fear in Greek Philosophy and Tragedy. Cambridge
         University Press.                                   
       Nussbaum, M. C. (2001). The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy and Philosophy
         (Rev. ed). Cambridge University Press.              
       Osborne, R. (1997). The Polis and Its Culture. In C.C.W. Taylor (Ed.), Routledge History of Philosophy
         (Volume 1). Taylor. Routledge.                      
       Osborne, R. (2006). When was the Athenian Democratic revolution?. In S. Goldhill & R. Osborne
         (Eds.), Rethinking revolutions through ancient Greece. Cambridge University Press.
       Osborne, R. (2018). The Transformation of Athens: Painted Pottery and the Creation of Classical Greece.
         Princeton University Press.                         
       Rockström, J., Steffen, W., & Noone, K. (2009). Planetary Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating
         Space for Humanity. Ecology and Society, 14(2).     
       Rockström, J., Gupta, J., Qin, D., et al. (2023). Safe and Just Earth System Boundaries. Nature, 619,
         Article 7968.                                       
       Rorty, A. (Ed.). (1992). Essays on Aristotle’s Poetics. Princeton University Press.

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Hans Jonas and Sophocles on the ethics of the Anthropocene Page 21 of 21 32
       Sandin, P., Peterson, M., Hansson, S. O., Rudén, C., & Juthe, A. (2002). Five charges against the precau-
         tionary principle. Journal of Risk Research, 5, 287–99.
       Schlosser, J. A. (2020). Herodotus in the Anthropocene. University of Chicago Press.
       Schmidt, J. C. (2013). Defending Hans Jonas? Environmental ethics: On the relation between philosophy
         of nature and ethics. Environmental Ethics, 35, 461–79.
       Scranton, R. (2015). Learning to Die in the Anthropocene: Reflections on the End of a Civilization. City
         Lights Publishers.                                  
       Seaford, R. (1994). Reciprocity and Ritual: Homer and Tragedy in the Developing City-State. Clarendon
         Press.                                              
       Segal, C. (1964). Sophocles’ praise of man and the conflicts of the ‘Antigone’. Arion, 3, 46–66.
       Segal, C. (1981). Tragedy and Civilization: An Interpretation of Sophocles. Harvard University Press.
       Shue, H. (2014). Climate Justice: Vulnerability and Protection. Oxford University Press.
       Steel, D. (2018). Philosophy and the Precautionary Principle: Science, Evidence, and Environmental
         Policy. Cambridge University Press.                 
       Sunstein, C. R. (2005). Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle. Cambridge University Press.
       Tsing, A. L. (2015). The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins.
         Princeton University Press.                         
       Vallor, S. (2016). Technology and the Virtues: A Philosophical Guide to a Future Worth Wanting. Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Vallor, S. (2024). The AI Mirror: How to Reclaim Our Humanity in an Age of Machine Thinking. Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Vernant, J. P. (1988a). Tensions and Ambiguities in Greek Tragedy. In Myth and Tragedy in Ancient
         Greece, trans. Janet Lloyd. Zone Books.             
       Vernant, J. P. (1988b). The Historical Moment of Tragedy in Greece: Some Social and Psychological Con-
         siderations. In Myth and Tragedy in Ancient Greece, trans. Janet Lloyd. Zone Books.
       Wallenhorst, N. (2023). A Critical Theory for the Anthropocene. Springer.
       White, J. (2024). Technocratic myopia: On the pitfalls of depoliticising the future. European Journal of
         Social Theory, 27(2), 260–278.                      
       Whiteside, K. H. H. (2006). Precautionary Politics: Principle and Practice in Confronting Environmental
         Risk. MIT Press.                                    
       Winkler, J. J. (1990). The Ephebes’ Song: Tragōidia and Polis. In J. J. Winkler & F. I. Zeitlin (Eds.), Noth-
         ing to Do with Dionysus. Princeton University Press.
       Wolin, R. (2001). Heidegger’s Children: Hannah Arendt, Karl Löwith, Hans Jonas, and Herbert Marcuse.
         Princeton Princeton University Press.               
       Woodruff, P. (2008). The Necessity of Theater: The Art of Watching and Being Watched. Oxford University.
       Yusoff, K. (2013). Geologic life: Prehistory, climate, futures in the Anthropocene. Environment and Plan-
         ning D: Society & Space, 31, 779–795.               
       Zylinska, J. (2014). Minimal Ethics for the Anthropocene. Open Humanities Press.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Benjamin Folit-Weinberg is Assistant Professor in the Department of Classics at Ohio State University.
       His research focuses on early and classical Greek thought. He is the author of Homer, Parmenides, and the
       Road to Demonstration (Cambridge University Press, 2022).
       Jens van ’t Klooster is Associate Professor of Political Economy at the Department of Political Science
       of the University of Amsterdam. His research focuses on the governance of the financial system and the
       politics of environmental policy.                     