[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:10            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00789-w            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Postcolonial global justice                           
                                                             
       Shuk Ying Chan, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2025, 280 pp.,
       ISBN: 9780691260228                                   
                                                             
       Kai Yui Samuel Chan1                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       Theories of anticolonialism and global justice have rarely been put into conversation
       with each other. Their traditions are embedded in distinct sets of canonical texts,
       and their advocates employ different methods: whereas anticolonial political thought
       largely engages in historical critique, contemporary global justice theory is consti-
       tuted by debates over normative cosmopolitan principles. In Postcolonial Global
       Justice, Shuk Ying Chan traverses these boundaries by theorizing global justice as
       ‘a project in decolonization’ (p. 10). This ambitious undertaking brings us an antico-
       lonial egalitarian framework that simultaneously interprets the neocolonial features
       of the world and envisions how we should change it—economically, culturally, and
       politically.                                          
         Chan bridges these two traditions through what she calls ‘historically inflected
       normative theorizing’, an approach through which she treats political thinkers of the
       past as ‘interlocutors in developing normative principles for the present’ (p. 9). This
       approach structures the main chapters of the book, each of which begins with a recon-
       struction of the colonial critique of a historical thinker, then proceeds to extend this
       critique into the present, which in turn motivates Chan’s own normative principles
       and practical suggestions. Thus structured, Chan centers on four twentieth-century
       anticolonial thinkers: Frantz Fanon, to tease out the inegalitarian face of colonialism;
       Kwame Nkrumah, to comprehend neocolonial economic relations; Aimé Césaire, to
       pin down the imperial features of cultural globalization; and Jawaharlal Nehru, to
       envision pathways towards postcolonial global governance.
         While one may want Chan to further elaborate on what she means by ‘inflection’
       (as opposed to, for instance, ‘informed’), or even quibble with how she connects her
       interpretive and normative analyses, it is hard to deny that her choice yielded sub-
       stantial payoffs. With this methodology, Chan develops a unique account of anticolo-
                                                             
         Kai Yui Samuel Chan                                 
         kyschan@oxy.edu                                     
       1 Occidental College, Los Angeles, CA 90041, USA      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        10 Page 2 of 4                          K. Y. S. Chan
                                                             
       nial egalitarianism that, among other contributions, (a) advances our understanding
       of colonialism; (b) radicalizes egalitarian theories; and (c) expands our decolonial
       visions beyond a statist global order.                
         In both academic work and beyond, the uses and meanings of the word colo-
       nialism, along with its various prefixes and suffixes, have proliferated such that, for
       some, the word has become a metaphor stripped of its radical force (Tuck & Yang,
       2012). However, in a world where old hierarchies linger while new ones emerge, we
       are in dire need of a conception that enables us to comprehend these shifting power
       relationships. Chan provides just that with her definition of (neo-)colonialism as the
       ‘political domination…backed by racial hierarchy to facilitated economic exploita-
       tion’ (p. 7). This conception captures the core features of existing usages, tracks the
       wrongs of the old empires, and yet also uncovers dynamic hierarchies beyond the
       rigid global north/south binary (p. 95).              
         This is best illustrated through Chan’s dealing of contemporary China as a ris-
       ing imperial power, both in its economic exploitation of southeast Asia and Africa
       (p. 110) and the Han Chinese colonization of peoples such as the Uyghurs (p. 199).
       Obviously, one could follow Chan in using her definition to scrutinize various inter-
       national agreements, but one could also reliably use it to tease out the colonial rela-
       tionships constituting various contemporary ‘territories’, ‘commonwealths’, and
       ‘autonomous regions’ ranging from Kashmir to Puerto Rico without falling into the
       trap of seeing all relationships as necessarily colonial.
         Remarkably, this analytical clarity does not come at the expense of depth. Chan’s
       expansive account of colonialism spans three major axes: power, esteem, and stand-
       ing (pp. 61–63). Across these three axes, Chan’s extension of esteem inequalities
       to the global domain is perhaps the most refreshing to those steeped in the egalitar-
       ian tradition. While most anticolonial theorists would find the discussion of cultural
       imperialism and Césaire familiar, Chan rightly suggests that relational egalitarians
       have mostly contained the discussion of status and esteem inequalities within the
       democratic state, and that while neorepublicans do scrutinize global relations of
       domination, they have solely focused on the hierarchy of power and authority (p. 64).
       Extending the latter’s account of brute power asymmetry, Chan defines the inequality
       of status as a dominant group holding ‘disproportionate power to produce represen-
       tations of the world’ (p. 142). This disproportionate power stems from a lopsided
       exchange of cultural goods, with postcolonial communities perceived as mere con-
       sumers without creative agency.                       
         The representations thus produced in turn legitimate the perpetuation of politi-
       cal and economic inequalities. The response then is not merely an account of cul-
       tural pluralism or multiculturalism, but rather a call to democratize global cultural
       exchanges and to recover creative agency for marginalized groups. Both here and in
       other chapters, Chan establishes an alternative ground for democratizing the global
       order beyond the conventional debate between statism and cosmopolitanism. While
       these theorists have been preoccupied with comparing the nation-state to cosmopoli-
       tan arrangements, Chan goes beyond this binary by diagnosing how political power
       is currently distributed unevenly across the globe.   
         Chan argues that this diagnosis is shared by the anticolonial intellectuals she reads,
       and that for them the nation-state was merely a historically contingent vehicle to

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Postcolonial global justice          Page 3 of 4 10   
                                                             
       combat imperial powers. With this position Chan joins the company of other anti-
       colonial theorists such as Adom Getachew and Inés Valdez in contesting the neces-
       sary historical and conceptual connection between anticolonialism and nationalism.
       Chan’s work is nonetheless distinctive in her integration of interpretive, critical, and
       normative argumentation. This integration is best illustrated by Chan’s engagement
       with Nehru.                                           
         Through an interpretation of how Nehru navigates the tensions between national
       and international solidarity, Chan lays the groundwork for diagnosing our world
       as subjected to a global undemocratic hegemony. Armed with that diagnosis, she
       then proceeds to her normative proposals on how we could build counterhegemonic
       coalitions and lay the groundwork for reforming global institutions, both proposals
       inspired by Nehru’s efforts and tethered to contemporary struggles such as those of
       the La Via Campesina. Both here and elsewhere, Chan’s analysis shines through her
       attention to the concrete transnational relationships of solidarity that run both beneath
       and beyond the nation-state. These relationships, coupled with Chan’s theoretical
       analysis, constitute the alternative spaces outside state and supra-state institutions
       that could address global power asymmetries (p. 188). 
         However, it is also in relation to this decolonial vision that one could press Chan
       on further addressing her own question: what is the ‘place of the nation-state in a just
       postcolonial world order’ (p. 19)? At times, Chan’s work suggests a vision in which
       the nation-state should wither away, supplanted by grassroots transnational coali-
       tions. Chan, however, is no naïve idealist. In fact, Chan suggests that she has decided
       to de-emphasize anti-statist intellectuals like Gandhi in favor of those who occupy a
       ‘middle-ground’, such that she could draw from their experiences of navigating the
       tensions between national and international solidarity (p. 24).
         While Chan does register these tensions in her interpretation of the respective
       intellectuals, these tensions seem to take a backseat in her normative analyses. In
       relation to statism, while Chan does consistently extend her analysis to non-state
       organizations, given that these organizations are very much embedded both legally
       and politically in a global statist order, one would like to invite Chan to say more
       about the relationships and tensions between non-state and state institutions in a post-
       colonial global order.                                
         Similarly, in relation to nationalism, while Chan does engage extensively with the
       nationalists, she nonetheless says little about how one should address contemporary
       nationalist sentiments and aspirations. To be fair, Chan, in her interpretation of Nehru,
       does discuss the psychological revolution that could decenter ‘nation-bounded forms
       of identification’ (p. 181). What remains unclear is whether there is any residual role
       for national solidarity to play, given that Chan does recognize the value of member-
       ship in social collectives (p. 15).                   
         I do believe that it would be productive to put Chan’s framework into conversation
       with the various theories of self-determination, especially with Young’s conception
       of self-determination as non-domination. Such dialogue would initiate an exchange
       on how we could take seriously ongoing nationalist currents but re-articulate them so
       as to make them compatible with international solidarity.
         The foregoing paragraph should be read less as a critique and more as evidence of
       the generativity of Chan’s project. By bridging two resourceful traditions and extend-

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        10 Page 4 of 4                          K. Y. S. Chan
                                                             
       ing both beyond the boundaries of the nation state, Chan opens up a wide array of
       research agendas on anticolonial resistance, transnational solidarity, and various
       inegalitarian practices. And just as Chan suggests in her concluding remarks, such
       research will only become more pertinent as ‘the inegalitarian legacies of colonial-
       ism become more visible in the global challenges such as climate change and global
       health emergencies’ (pp. 199–200).                    
         Chan’s book prepares us for such challenges by offering us the interpretive tools
       to uncover global injustices and expand our horizons to imagine a more just global
       order.                                                
       Declarations                                          
       Competing Interests The author has no competing interest to declare.
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Tuck, E., & Yang, Y. K. (2012). Decolonization is not a metaphor. Decolonization: Indigeneity Education
         & Society, 1(1), 1–40.                              
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             