[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:20            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00798-9            
       REVIEW ESSAY                                          
                                                             
       Normative reconstructions of property rights in German
       classical philosophy: recognition and pluralism       
                                                             
                                                             
       Bogdan Ovcharuk1                                      
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       The concept of property in Kant, Fichte, and Hegel: Freedom, right, and recog-
       nition, by Jacob Blumenfeld, Routledge, 2023, 203 pp. 
       Property and its forms in classical German philosophy, by David James. Cam-
       bridge University Press, 2023, 274 pp.                
       ‘The first person who, having enclosed a plot of land, took it into his head to say this
       is mine and found people simple enough to believe him, was the true founder of civil
       society’ (Rousseau, 1992, p. 44)—thus Rousseau illustrates the prehistory of the ‘nat-
       ural state’, in which one’s claim to exclusive possession is another’s immiseration.
       In political theory, the question of property marks the transition to modern politics.
       Not that forms of property did not exist before, but the transformation of classical
       natural law into the idea of natural rights rendered the security of individuals, and
       their property, central to the justification of public law within a bounded state. The
       short but philosophically revolutionary period of German idealism, which began with
       Kant’s 1781 Critique of Pure Reason and culminated in Hegel’s 1807 Phenomenol-
       ogy of Spirit, is often associated not with the politics of property but with a cobweb
       of (post-)metaphysical thinking that gave rise to Marxism, continental philosophy,
       and various forms of critical theory. One of the greatest achievements of two recent
       books by David James and Jacob Blumenfeld is that these systematic reconstruc-
       tions—the first in the Anglophone world—of Kant’s, Fichte’s, and Hegel’s thinking
       on the question of property, reinstate the rightful place of these philosophers as critics
       of the perennial political problem of modernity.      
         The revolutionary stir in the world of philosophy that German idealism initiated
       has often been compared to that of the French revolution. Although the problem of
       property has not been settled in either world, the achievements of philosophy are eas-
       ier to preserve and reinvigorate. A systematic reconstruction of German philosophy
       is in no way outdated—not only because the problem of what is ‘mine and thine’ has
         Bogdan Ovcharuk                                     
         ovcharuk@yorku.ca                                   
       1 Department of Politics, Faculty of Liberal Arts & Professional Studies (LA&PS), York
         University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        20 Page 2 of 6                          B. Ovcharuk  
                                                             
       not become obsolete, but, more crucially, because the dominant ways of theorizing
       property today are predicated on the philosophies of Hume and Locke that precede
       German idealism. Against this backdrop, the works of Blumenfeld and James con-
       front the rights-based and utility-based accounts of property (Blumenfeld, pp. 5–10;
       James, pp. 6–10).                                     
         The foundations of the theory that takes property as a function of maximizing
       economic utility and efficiency are attributed to Hume. From this radically empiricist
       perspective, there can be no deduction or justification of the right to property, let
       alone of any particular form of property, but only observations that certain institu-
       tionalized forms of property facilitate the maximization of wealth. This account of
       property is consequentialist. Should a form of property fail to achieve economic util-
       ity, its justification would no longer obtain. The theory of private property rights is
       complementary to this consequentialist account. Grounded in the liberal philosophy
       of Locke, property is understood as an a priori exclusive right to a thing. Following
       the modern theory of natural right, the libertarian theory accepts the right to private
       property either as an inherent norm or as an entitlement bestowed by positive law.
       This legalistic approach offers various ways of justifying the appropriation, use, and
       transfer of a thing, but the exclusionary nature of possession leads to social obliga-
       tions that stop at the principle of negative freedom, failing to empower any broader
       social purpose. Taken together, these two major property paradigms presuppose scar-
       city, free-market relations, and individualism of rights or preferences. As Blumenfeld
       succinctly puts it, they coalesce around the definition of ‘property as the right to
       exclude others so as to protect liberty and maximize utility’ (p. 9).
         Beati possidentes: ‘[h]appy are those who are in possession’ (Kant, 1991, p. 251).
       Yet, by recognizing each other’s right to mutually exclude others from our property,
       we do not recognize the social facts of material inequality between people, or how
       such inequality impinges on a broader social good. Blumenfeld’s The Concept of
       Property in Kant, Fichte, and Hegel: Freedom, right, and recognition and James’s
       Property and Its Forms in Classical German Philosophy aim to expound what it
       would look like for us to recognize each other in a more social way without eschew-
       ing the concept of property altogether. Attentive to the forms of social domination
       that ensue from material inequality, James’s argument turns on an account of social
       recognition. The various ways in which the German thinkers in question articulate
       forms of property offer a triadic and intersubjective conception of the justification
       of property that dislodges the dominant tendency to treat property rights as a dyadic
       ‘relationship’ between a person and a thing (pp. 11, 190).
         Sharing James’ motivation to advance the normativity of mutual recognition, Blu-
       menfeld’s work deepens this social and relational account by reconstructing the meta-
       physical and material conditions that determine the concept of property. In this way,
       the tripartite theory of property is mediated by the consideration that we are finite and
       needy beings living on a shared planet (p. 254). The reader will notice that the focus
       on social recognition in German theories of right enables both authors to hit more
       squarely one of their declared targets—the rights-based account of property. The eco-
       nomically utilitarian, consequentialist theory of property is addressed by proxy. This
       explains the restricted role Marx plays in their works. Marx’s contribution is not con-
       sidered as a critique of ‘vulgar political economy’—that is, as a critique of economic

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative reconstructions of property rights in German classical… Page 3 of 6 20
                                                             
       abstractions as necessary expressions of historically specific social relations. Rather,
       it is mostly restricted to a political-economic critique of legal abstractions. This use
       of Marx salvages James’ and Blumenfeld’s works from economism and historicism,
       but at the price of addressing the utilitarian theory of property only indirectly.
         The perspective centred on mutual recognition, first popularized and radicalized
       by Kojève’s existential-Marxian reading of Hegel and now an established, hetero-
       geneous framework even within analytic philosophy, affords both authors consider-
       able latitude. James situates his normative intervention on the tripartite concept of
       mutual recognition within debates on distributive justice. By avoiding the preva-
       lent dichotomy between recognition and distribution, he makes the strong claim that
       the substance of distribution depends not on the mechanisms of distribution but on
       which form of property is recognized in and by a society (p. 192). James nonethe-
       less remains a pluralist as to which particular forms of property, or combination of
       property forms, the conceptual apparatus of mutual recognition will yield: private,
       common, or collective. Kant, Fichte, Hegel, and Marx are shown to have preferred
       different forms of property, but it is their agreement on the fundamental, recognition-
       based structure of justification of general and enforceable norms that matters. The
       conceptual work must stop here, and a real-life democratic process should ensue in
       its stead (p. 13).                                    
         Blumenfeld establishes his argument within a framework that includes liberal
       theories of distributive justice but goes well beyond them in scope. His study of
       the German thinkers is contextualized by a detailed account of five recent shifts in
       theories of property. These include perspectives on new or immaterial property, the
       bundle-of-rights theory, the law-and-economics approach, liberal egalitarianism, and
       critical or ‘progressive’ property theories (pp. 10–27). The latter cluster of theories
       is clearly preferred, yet judged wanting in its philosophical foundations. Like James,
       Blumenfeld does not express a preference for a particular form of property; unlike
       James, however, he takes it upon himself not only to argue for the primacy of the
       concept of mutual recognition but also to undertake the normative reconstruction of
       a general theory of property based on the thinkers in question. The systematically
       accrued notions draw to the close the following theoretical apparatus: ‘each claim to
       possess something exclusively as one’s own is implicitly a summons to another per-
       son to act, to join together in creating a political community of free equals that can
       accommodate each other’s distinct identities as vulnerable subjects within a system
       of material and moral interdependence’ (p. 248, emphasis in original).
         The normative reconstitution of the concept of property in these works takes the
       form of a history of ideas, with individual chapters dedicated to separate thinkers.
       James interprets Kant’s Doctrine of Right as internally divided between his doctrine
       of natural right and the more far-reaching political consequences of his principle of
       public right. The natural right justification of ‘intelligible’ exclusive ownership of a
       thing—famously articulated by Kant as both provisional yet peremptory ‘original
       acquisition’—is said to fail on account of Kant’s principle of the united will of all
       and his avant la lettre theory of recognition. If mutual recognition is rendered central
       to Kant’s theory of right, argues James with reference to Kant’s theory of full citizen-
       ship and the essay on Enlightenment, the outcome of his theory would be collective
       or common property justified by public right and public use of reason.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        20 Page 4 of 6                          B. Ovcharuk  
                                                             
         Focusing on the same text, Blumenfeld agrees that the moment of mutual recogni-
       tion is present in Kant, but he does not see the account of possession as something
       to be overcome by alternative forms of property; rather, he takes the provisionality
       of property forms to be an integral part of the general theory of property. This provi-
       sionality is shown to be subject to the mutual recognition of the public order, in which
       broader and unchosen social conditions of human freedom are taken into account—
       most notably, our finite existence on a shared planet, which Kant elaborates on in
       his enigmatic notion of original possession of land and reflections on cosmopolitan
       peace.                                                
         Both authors then restore Fichte as a theorist of embodied intersubjective recog-
       nition and as a critic of liberalism. The shared focus on the Foundations of Natural
       Right, Closed Commercial State and Rechtslehre lectures leads both authors to con-
       verge on an interpretation of Fichte’s notion of property as predicated on the mutual
       recognition of the right to live off one’s labour and to enjoy leisure. For James, Fich-
       te’s concept of recognition yields a form of collective property, although the means of
       achieving it are said to be marked by legal repression. The emphasis differs slightly
       for Blumenfeld, for whom the mutual recognition of the sphere of effective action
       and its material conditions becomes part of the general theory of property.
         Hegel is a case in point for how choices of textual evidence inform differences in
       perspective. By focusing on Hegel’s late Philosophy of Right, James’ Hegel resolves
       the problem at the heart of Kant’s theory: the tension between the exclusionary pri-
       vate property and the universal concept of mutual recognition. Against the dyadic
       ‘person–thing’ scholarly interpretation of property in Hegel, the principle of ‘abstract
       right’ is said to achieve a tripartite structure of recognition through the contractual
       alienation of property in bourgeois civil society, with the larger institutions of ethi-
       cal life addressing its excesses, albeit in a limited way. The ‘conservative’ Hegel
       is softened: his political economy appears more liberal-welfarist, and the logic of
       the archaic institutions of the Prussian estates is shown to follow from ethical con-
       cerns for ‘national property’. The co-existence of other forms of property with the
       dominance of the private form, even if only implicit in Hegel on this reading, further
       serves the strategic purpose of supporting James’s normative and pluralist claim that
       various forms of property can coexist within a particular society, provided that they
       are fundamentally justified by the conceptual force of mutual recognition.
         In Blumenfeld, by contrast, we encounter a young and ‘radical’ Hegel driven by
       the experience of the negative. By placing the focus on Hegel’s early System of Ethi-
       cal Life and the Jena lectures on the same topic, Blumenfeld shows that abstract right
       is preconditioned by a phenomenological account of needy and vulnerable human
       beings who come to possess things through the intersubjective processes of labour
       and the use of tools. The abstract right thus appears here only as a failed attempt at
       mutual recognition, leading to struggle, the further recognition of material depen-
       dency, and the possibility of alternative forms of property and genuine interdepen-
       dence. Blumenfeld’s decision to contest Alex Honneth’s pacification of Hegel by
       emphasizing the moments of failed recognition and centrality of property attests to an
       interpretative strategy that goes beyond textual exegesis of the early Hegel (which is
       beyond impressive), to engage with the tradition of politically radical interpretations
       of Hegel akin to those of Georg Lukács and Gillian Rose.

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Normative reconstructions of property rights in German classical… Page 5 of 6 20
                                                             
         The slight difference in approaches—more scholarly in James and more politically
       oriented in Blumenfeld—reveals itself in a peculiar way in their respective treat-
       ments of Marx. James takes Marx to conform to the concept of mutual recognition
       through his theory of the free and social individual. A survey of Marx’s critique of
       private property rights as expressions of commodity-exchange relations, as well as of
       his political writings, especially the Critique of the Gotha Programme, demonstrates,
       however, that Marx’s various attempts to allude to collective or common property
       did not succeed in articulating a form of property that would satisfy the mutual rec-
       ognition commitment imputed to him. While Blumenfeld notably does not devote
       a chapter to Marx, the reader will nonetheless find Marxian concerns shaping the
       book’s framing and integrated throughout various chapters, most notably in the dis-
       cussions of labour in Fichte and inequality in Hegel. In fact, Blumenfeld’s reading of
       the young Hegel is, to a large extent, compatible with Marx. If James treats Marx as
       a critic of what he takes to be Hegel’s commitment to abstract right from the perspec-
       tive of material needs (p. 174), Blumenfeld argues that the young Hegel had already
       undertaken this kind of critique, showing how abstract right and formal equality give
       rise to material inequality and domination (p. 192).  
         At the same time, the reader must undertake some additional work to trace Marx’s
       influence not only in Blumenfeld’s interpretative strategy, but also across the exten-
       sive body of secondary literature on theories of property and on the philosophers
       under discussion. The ambition to elaborate a general and internally complex con-
       cept of property by drawing on Marx’s philosophical precursors weighs heavily on
       Blumenfeld’s scholarship. The result is that James’s exposition, even if more modest
       in the scope of sources reviewed, affords greater accessibility, not only in grasping
       Marx’s political economy of rights and his attempts to adumbrate alternative forms
       of property, but also in providing more explicit ways of thinking collective or com-
       mon property. For readers less acquainted with the political debates emerging from
       the metaphysical subtleties of German idealism, the paradoxical result of this stylistic
       difference is that James’s sharper focus may appear more politically engaging, while
       Blumenfeld’s more radical concerns can be harder to parse.
         The political import of both works should be primarily assessed in light of their
       shared methodological commitments. Both authors are committed to something like
       recognition pluralism. This methodological-normative standpoint takes intersubjec-
       tive mutual recognition as the baseline of the concept of property in German ide-
       alism, while remaining pluralist with respect to specific forms of property and the
       concomitant forms of social and political organization. James insists that no single
       form of property should be favoured in such an exegesis, and that these forms—and,
       which seems more desirable for him, combinations of these forms—will depend on
       democratic will-formation and contestation. Notwithstanding the more systematic
       conceptual work undertaken by Blumenfeld, he likewise commits himself to a form
       of recognition pluralism by emphasizing that the realization of the concept of prop-
       erty, even if articulated from the cosmopolitan viewpoint, will depend on concrete
       societies. Blumenfeld’s synthetic attempts to formulate the concept of property are
       thus preliminary, following the motile principles found in each thinker: incomplete-
       ness (Kant), reciprocity (Fichte), and social struggle (Hegel). Democratic contes-

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        20 Page 6 of 6                          B. Ovcharuk  
                                                             
       tation in James and preliminary articulations in Blumenfeld thus demarcate both the
       integrity and the limits of their inquiries.          
         Recognition pluralism meets its strategic limit in the vexed political problem of private
       property—the form that predominates in the most powerful states and in the globalized
       world. As both authors do not fail to admit, the exclusionary character of private prop-
       erty—original acquisition depending on the dyadic person–thing ‘relation’—was articu-
       lated by Kant alongside the tripartite idea of the united will of all. Thus Hegel observed
       that, in reality, the exclusive right to private property is impossible without overall soci-
       etal sanction—a formal and contradictory mutual recognition. What appears as a formal
       contradiction should be recognized as a real, content-related contradiction, addressing
       which necessitates acknowledging not only that private property is a failed attempt at
       full mutual recognition of one another as finite and needy beings (Blumenfeld), but also
       that the very concept of formal mutual recognition is itself historically determined. The
       mutually recognized exclusive right to private property, as Marx’s works demonstrate, is
       determined by the historical situation in which human beings are ‘free’ in being separated
       from the means of production and social reproduction, and are ‘free’ in their capacity to
       sell their ‘labour power’ for a wage. The political limit of both works, however, is that
       the authors do not explicitly take the situation of the ‘double freedom’ of workers as a
       strategic point for their normative reconstructions. The systematized forms of property do
       not present concrete possibilities to transform the dominant institution of private property
       that hitherto benefited those who own capital and impoverished those who have nothing
       to sell but their labour power, both within particular states and in the concrete totality of
       colonialism. Instead, the plurality of forms (James) and the conceptual elaboration for
       concrete societies (Blumenfeld) depend on a normative account of mutual recognition in
       which ‘free’ workers may be recognized—or, equally, misrecognized.
         It is in a public library, James’s exemplar of the collective or common use of a thing,
       that the thought of ‘a young journalist from Trier,’ with whom Blumenfeld begins his
       work, matured. Whether the ambition to realize German philosophy was abandoned
       or historically missed, Blumenfeld and James keep its normative purchase alive. The
       complementarity of perspectives on Kant, Fichte, and Hegel, combined with fidelity to
       the concept of mutual recognition and to a certain Marxian form of social criticism (not
       to mention the fact that the books were published in the same year), allows the reader a
       sustained comparative perspective on the state of the art in the contemporary reception of
       modern German theories of property. This will render these works indispensable in politi-
       cal theory and political philosophy curricula and satisfy the intellectual needs of a more
       politically engaged readership.                       
       References                                            
       Kant, I. (1991). The metaphysics of Morals. Translated and with an introduction by Mary Gregor. Cam-
         bridge University Press.                            
       Rousseau, J. J. (1992). Discourse on the Origin of Inequality. Translated by Donald A. Cress. Introduction
         by James Miller. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             