[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:19            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00801-3            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Disembodiment: corporeal politics of radical refusal  
                                                             
       Banu Bargu, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2024, 504pp., ISBN:
       9780197608531                                         
                                                             
       James Martel1                                         
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       Disembodiment is a brilliant and highly timely book. Banu Bargu explores the rela-
       tionship between structures of human subjectivity and our physical bodies by consid-
       ering the way that regimes attempt to control bodies and the way that bodies are able
       to resist that control, sometimes even without the deliberate will of those who inhabit
       them. It might seem strange to find solace in a book about people who starve them-
       selves to death or sew their lips together. Yet, it reminds us that the power of domi-
       nation can never be utter and to think that it can be amounts to falling into the very
       kinds of philosophical and ideological assumptions that the book serves to challenge.
         Disembodiment is a history of both the body and the subject that was meant to
       colonize it, a kind of dialectical relationship that lies at the center of much of the
       history of the global north and south, albeit in very different ways. For Bargu, the
       subject is the product of five hundred years of colonialism, slavery, genocide, white
       supremacy and capitalism. The subject was engineered to be beaten down and utterly
       determined. The problem, from the perspective of capitalist power, is that this sub-
       ject is, of necessity located in and as a body. It is both the site of domination and, by
       definition, a place where domination finds its limits.
         In many ways, I think this book is a good response to James Scott’s work. Even as
       he widely expands the nature and sources of resistance, Scott does not normally allow
       for forms of resistance that could actually win. Bargu shows that resistance stems
       from what she calls the political ontology of the body. Any form of resistance that is
       based in such ontology has a major advantage over the kinds of powers that seek to
       dominate it. As Bargu points out, the state's power over the subject represents a quix-
       otic desire to determine the universe. This helps to explain the nature of such power,
       why it is so violent and aggressive. It also helps to explain why even its more benign
                                                             
                                                             
         James Martel                                        
         jmartel@sfsu.edu                                    
       1 San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA 94132, USA
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        19 Page 2 of 3                            J. Martel  
                                                             
       forms of expression readily turn into something quite a bit more violent, something
       we are seeing very clearly in our own time.           
         The body, by contrast, is only ever ontological and this material facticity is what
       gives us the power both to resist, and ultimately defeat, illicit forms of authority as
       well as metaphysical categories like the subject that it uses to divide and conquer the
       world.                                                
         Bargu beautifully weaves critical theory together with other disciplines. One key
       example is the way that she connects the work of Horkheimer and Adorno to the
       film Hunger by Steve McQueen, which depicts the hunger strike and death of Bobby
       Sands. Bargu works off of Horkheimer and Adorno’s well-known depiction of Odys-
       seus as he passes by the sirens, having his oarsmen plug their ears with wax while
       he is bound to the mast and thus able to enjoy, but not succumb to, the lure of their
       song. The siren’s song, which is like the lure of capitalism itself, serves as a ‘mythi-
       cal ‘interpellation’ of the individual into a sovereign subject,’ (p. 160, emphasis in
       original). Yet the allure of that song is a lie. The true choice is either between no
       enjoyment (the oarsmen) or a situation in which the subject tricks themselves into
       enjoyment through an act of self-preservation and instrumentalism. Either way, there
       is no ontological fulfillment only its (evident) lack or its (false) appearance.
         For Bargu, Bobby Sands takes a different path: ‘Sands too hears the Siren’s song
       but not only does he listen to it, but he also lets himself be taken by it’ (p. 161). Sands
       allows his being interpellated by the sirens ‘in order to redeem the unfulfilled promise
       of freedom from domination’ (p. 162). Thus, unlike Odysseus, Sands actually gets a
       taste of the freedom that the lies of liberalism promises albeit only through his own
       self-destruction. This reading is far from a romanticization of Sands’ actions. Rather,
       it shows that Sands is able to access his own bodily autonomy to defy British political
       power even as he asserts the dignity and authority of his own embodied self. What
       looks like an act of pure nihilism becomes, in Bargu’s reading, something powerful,
       creative and, in its own way, victorious. It demonstrates how vulnerable and false the
       power that it resists really is.                      
         Bargu also borrows from Helmuth Plessner’s idea of the ‘excentric’, that is, the
       state of both being and having a body. While the enlightenment subject is only ever
       about the having, the notion of both being and having a body simultaneously changes
       our relationship to our body in powerful ways. For Bargu, Sands’ act of disembodi-
       ment shows that when you give up the false agency that is promised by liberal capi-
       talism you can achieve an agency that you actually possess, something which inheres
       not in ‘you’ as a separate subject that hovers over your body but rather by acting
       through that body itself.                             
         Bargu also engages with Marx in novel and important ways. In Marx’s under-
       standing, the body is the one and only source of value, and therefore the extraction
       of such value becomes the bedrock of capitalist profit-seeking. However, despite all
       of its efforts to the contrary, capitalism has not been able to overcome the fact that
       the human body cannot work twenty-four hours a day. We need food, rest and other
       basics to keep producing. Mechanization is an attempt to get around the body but for
       Marx it has never been able to serve as a source of exploitation beyond the crystalized
       human labor that it represents.                       

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Disembodiment: corporeal politics of radical refusal Page 3 of 3 19
                                                             
         Furthermore, when multiple bodies are brought together to work, the basic mate-
       rial powers that adhere to the body become even more powerful. This is true under
       non-capitalist conditions too but under capitalism that collective power is alienated
       by capitalism even as the factory setting produces bodily collectivity and hence col-
       lective resistance as well. In contrast to both Horkheimer and Adorno and even Marx,
       for Bargu the body—and collections of bodies—is and are the only agents in town.
         The fact that such agency generally gets expressed through dramatic acts of dis-
       embodiment makes sense. In a way, the body has been so overwritten for so long that
       the only way to reenter it—or at least one of the only ways—is to somehow damage
       or destroy it, to bring it back into the level of haptic communication. One example of
       this comes for Bargu when in 2014 Afghani refugees in Turkey publicly sewed their
       lips shut. Here, they are denying their body food and speech but also allowing the
       body itself to assert its own different forms of communication.
         This example brings me back to my initial discussion of Scott because Bargu
       herself concedes that in so many ways, the forms of rebellion that she is interested
       in don’t lead to anything like victory or an end to capitalism. Is this then merely an
       extension of Scott’s reading of forms of resistance that do not rise to the level of
       revolution and the overturning of oppressive systems of power? I think that Bargu is
       onto something quite a bit more powerful than this.   
         Bargu’s work is important because she helps us to understand what a successful
       revolutionary movement in the global north might look like. She has identified the
       real power of the collective in the fact of the human body, in a political ontology.
       When we forget that we are excentric beings, we think that our bodies work for us
       and do our bidding. In thinking this way we transfer agency from the body, the only
       actual agent, to something else (‘the people’ or whatever other abstraction that we
       may refer to). In so doing, we lose our way from the get-go. Here, we allow the liberal
       subject, that most insidious and gaslighting of metaphysical concepts, to sneak back
       in and ultimately do in our revolutionary movements.  
         I don’t think the revolution that comes from bodily agency will be marked only by
       people starving themselves or sewing their lips together. Rather I think these forms
       of expression of bodily power serve to remind us of what real power comes from. In
       between revolutionary moments such acts of resistance remind us that the body is a
       formidable object, what Bargu calls an ‘elementary “political institution”’ (p. 247).
       If we can learn these lessons from Mohammed Boazizi, Bobby Sands, the Malaysian
       women who start shrieking in their factories, the Afghani lip sewers, those who threw
       themselves off the roof of Foxconn and the plethora of other embodied agents who
       populate this book, we can benefit from what Rosa Luxemburg calls the ‘living politi-
       cal school’. Here, we can see more clearly how bodies can learn from other bodies, as
       well as from history, from experience and from the material sensorium all around us.
       The excentric bodies that we are (and ‘have’) can thus learn how to fight better and,
       most importantly, how to win once and for all.        
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             