[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:2             
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00783-8            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Remapping Sovereignty: decolonization and self-       
       determination in North American Indigenous political  
       thought                                               
                                                             
       David Myer Temin, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2023, 288 pp.,
       ISBN: 9780226827285                                   
                                                             
       Kevin Bruyneel1                                       
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Indigenous people’s politics is getting much more attention in political theory than
       it did a few decades ago. Now the phrase ‘much more’ is relative, for the subfield
       has paid such meager attention to Indigenous people for so long that even a slight
       increase still counts as much more than what was before – and what was before
       tended to elide Indigenous people’s stated concerns. The focus for too long has been
       on appeasing settler anxieties and the evident hypocrisies of settler societies. This
       is what I call political theory as disavowal, where attention to Indigenous concerns
       serves primarily as the vehicle for settler societies to take another look at themselves
       for themselves, but not too close a look, just enough to apply a little colonial con-
       cealer here and there, a little green of multiculturalism to mask the red of Red Power.
         However, the past twenty years or so has seen a slow but steady shift, as Indig-
       enous political action and voices are being taken more seriously in political theory
       – again, still not nearly seriously enough – primarily due to the emergence of field-
       shaping Indigenous political and social theorists. The result has been an emergent
       body of scholarship that takes Indigenous politics seriously for their own sake, not
       as a cipher for redeeming the US, Canada or any other settler state that remains
       drenched in the blood of conquest. To this list of emergent scholarship, one can add
       Remapping Sovereignty.                                
         In a rigorous and revealing analysis, settler scholar David Myer Temin grapples
       with how canonical Indigenous political writers in the 20th century conceptualized
       and disagreed about how Indigenous peoples can forge self-determining communi-
       ties under settler colonial hegemony. In so doing, Temin makes three distinct contri-
       butions that will prove of value to readers: (i) the richness and diversity of Indigenous
                                                             
         Kevin Bruyneel                                      
         kbruyneel@babson.edu                                
       1 Babson College, Wellesley, MA 02457, USA            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        2  Page 2 of 4                           K. Bruyneel 
                                                             
       political thought, (ii) the struggle of the colonized to theorize and actualize self-
       determination in and across the boundaries of settler colonial governance, and (iii)
       what Indigenous political thought can open up for radical imaginaries.
         First and foremost for a wide-ranging readership, especially for those new to the
       subject-matter, Temin’s book offers a delicate, detailed survey of the thought of six
       important Indigenous writer-activists; Zitkála-Šá (Yankton Dakota), Vine Deloria Jr
       (Yankton Dakota), Ella Deloria (Yankton Dakota), George Manuel (Secwépemc),
       Howard Adams (Métis) and Lee Maracle (Stó꞉lō). In three of the four chapters,
       Temin choreographs a pas de deux of writers – Zitkála-Šá and Vine Deloria (Chap. 1)
       on self-determination, non-domination and the vagaries of colonial citizenship, Ella
       and Vine Deloria (Chap. 2) on the fraught bargain of treaties with colonizing states,
       and Adams and Maracle (Chap. 4) on Indigenous Marxisms – with Manuel (Chap. 3)
       getting a solo spin in a chapter on land stewardship, culture and Fourth World trans-
       nationalism, accompanied at times by Tanzanian activist and leader Julius Nyerere.
         The richness of Temin’s readings is amplified by these dialogical encounters that
       draw out the complexity of each thinker and the heterogeneity of Indigenous political
       thought as a whole. One could pick out any individual chapter on its own and benefit
       from a better grasp of these writers, but the wider point of the book pitches us neces-
       sarily into the perennial challenges faced by colonized subjects.
         The second contribution is the book’s venture into the master’s tools cliché, only
       in this case the question is: can the colonized forge collective self-determination with
       the colonizer’s tools, still yet in the colonizer’s house? To this end, the first two
       chapters take the reader through the Indigenous struggle to respond to and potentially
       leverage the conferral of US citizenship to Indigenous people in 1924, and the effort
       to weigh the benefits of treaties between Indigenous nations and the US state.
         Be it individual citizenship or nation-to-nation treaties, the challenge here for
       Indigenous peoples remains how to navigate an inescapable (as of yet) relationship
       with the colonizing state. US citizenship can mean absorption or even erasure of
       Indigenous collective attachment – and many Indigenous people refused this loaded
       gift – while others saw it as a vehicle for working inside and outside the colonial
       system to embolden Indigenous self-determination. Similarly, treaties have been used
       to steal Indigenous land and undermine self-determination but can also be a produc-
       tive site of juridical and political fashioning of Indigenous national principles and
       practices.                                            
         There is no singular, or authentic Indigenous political response here. Rather, Temin
       does the careful work of setting out and then allowing us as the reader to live with
       these tensions, not resolve them. These Indigenous radical thinkers did not have the
       comfort of easy answers (nor should we, and indeed as settlers we should be wary of
       easy answers), but rather they posit the potentialities and pitfalls of struggle, surviv-
       ance and resurgence. In this sense, one can read the first two chapters as focusing on
       Indigenous radical thinkers who are more on the defensive in relation to colonialism,
       understandably so.                                    
         With Chap. 3 and Chap. 4, we get Indigenous thought on the offense. To start, the
       core of George Manuel’s contributions centers around an assertive recasting of the
       meaning and practice of the relationship amongst land, culture and peoples, with an
       eye to working across and against the figurative and literal boundaries of nations and

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Remapping Sovereignty: decolonization and self-determination in… Page 3 of 4 2
                                                             
       states. For Manuel, his ‘land-culture dialectic’ (p. 118) openly challenges the anti-
       relationality of colonial capitalism that severs land, life and culture as living relation-
       ships so they can be fodder for extraction, commodification and accumulation. To
       this end, Manuel forged encounters of Fourth World and Third World approaches to
       decolonization, and this is where Nyerere cuts in as interlocutor with Manuel, not just
       on paper, but as a matter of historical fact.         
         Building upon and resonating with the work of Yellowknives Dene political theo-
       rist Glen Coulthard, Temin provides the helpful notion of ‘transnational internation-
       alism’ to characterize anti-colonial alliances that transcend and refuse statist logics
       and borders through a commitment to the stewardship of lands, culture, and life in
       an imagined ‘stewardship world order’, as Temin phrases it (p. 135). This approach
       does not collapse or refuse to distinguish Third and Fourth World geo-political con-
       texts and projects, but it does read in the fascinating relationship between Manuel
       and Nyerere an effort to conceptualize forms of self-determination that are ‘non-
       anthropocentric’ – in which non-human life and land are active relational partners –
       and thereby work ‘beyond’ and at odds with geo-spatial and governance logics of the
       ‘sovereign state’ and colonial capitalist imperatives (p. 104). The influence of Third
       World thinkers also has a shaping force on the Indigenous Marxisms of Adams and
       Maracle, especially the work of Frantz Fanon, through which Adams and Maracle
       both construct their anti-colonial Marxism.           
         As with all the chapters, the distinctions between the paired authors suggest alter-
       native paths for us to consider, from the developmental one of Adams to the more
       revolutionary and transformative one pursued by Maracle. Most compelling, I find,
       is Maracle’s focus on gender in decolonization theory and praxis given that vio-
       lence against women and girls remains so central to colonial rule. She rejected the
       notion of Fourth World as too conciliatory, as to her it implied the possibility of co-
       existence with settler, first-world societies, rather than their revolutionary overthrow
       and replacement. It is fitting then that Maracle’s ideas get the final say, in a sense, in
       Temin’s arc of 20th century Indigenous thinkers. Maracle refuses any sort of accom-
       modationist approach to the relationship to the settler state, or any state or state-sys-
       tem. Her demand of attention to the gendered harm at the core of statism, capitalism
       and colonialism speaks loudly to the imperative of Indigenous feminisms as being
       central to how we imagine decolonization’s enactment and ends. In this regard, Lee
       Maracle’s work has never felt so timely.              
         This leads to the last intervention, which returns to the purpose of political theo-
       ry’s engagement with Indigenous politics, with due attention to the fact that a major-
       ity of the field is comprised of non-Indigenous settler scholars, such as Temin and
       this reviewer. In the midst of multiple climate and extinction catastrophes that, as we
       are reminded by Kyle Powys Whyte (Citizen Potawatomi), to Indigenous people are
       ‘unprecedently old catastrophes’ (Whyte, 2018, pp. 8–9), Indigenous radical thought
       offers critiques and relational perspectives that are as urgent as ever. At the same
       time, such work by settler scholars and activists cannot reproduce the extractivist and
       self-serving mode of earlier and some contemporary scholarship.
         The purpose of engaging with Indigenous political thought is not to redeem or
       reform settler society, from ourselves or for ourselves, but to look beyond and at odds
       with it. Colonial racial capitalism is coming for everyone, if not at the same time or

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        2  Page 4 of 4                           K. Bruyneel 
                                                             
       to the same degree. Temin’s work allows us to walk with and learn from Indigenous
       thinkers who have been at the forefront of this threat and have lived and imagined a
       world beyond it.                                      
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Whyte, K. P. (2018). Climate change: An unprecedentedly old catastrophe. Broadsheet, 8–9.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             