[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:25            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00800-4            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Freedom for All: what a liberal society could be      
                                                             
       Alex Zakaras, Yale university Press, 2025, pp. 1-326, ISBN: 978-0-300-
       28176-7                                               
                                                             
       Anders Berg-Sørensen1                                 
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       In a time with intensifying attacks on liberal democracy and the liberal Zeitgeist in a
       pejorative sense, we are also witness to politicians, public intellectuals, and political
       theorists who stand up defending liberalism and liberal democracy in all its variety.
       In Freedom for All, Alex Zakaras has articulated his version of what a liberal society
       could look like, addressing the critiques of liberalism and the various economic, polit-
       ical, and social challenges that have made the illiberal renaissance possible. Zakaras
       develops an argument for a radical liberalism based on the idea of an expansive equal
       freedom. In formulating radical liberalism, he repudiates the critiques of liberalism
       that understand liberalism as the excessive individual pursuit of private interests only
       and that defend a postliberal order founded on the ruins of liberal democracy. That
       kind of exaggerating strawmen does not contribute to constructive problem-solving
       and visions for a future society but rather digs the trenches in the political landscape
       deeper according to Zakaras.                          
         The context for the argument is primarily contemporary American politics and
       society but given the trans-Atlantic networks and transnational movements of illib-
       eralism the diagnoses and discussion could also apply in Europe. Instead of reacting
       against or rejecting liberalism and liberal democracy, as critics on both the left and
       the right do, Zakaras points at the varieties of liberalism and the continuous devel-
       opment of liberalism by addressing concrete problems and their possible solutions
       based on liberal ideals. The wide-ranging focus is liberal society and citizenry, not
       only liberal democracy and government. Crucial in the argumentation is the idea of
       an expansive equal freedom for all citizens in contrast to the existing inequalities and
       hierarchies, economic, political, and social, ethnic, racial, and gender. In that sense,
       Zakaras admits the idealist ambitions of radical liberalism, at the same time as it
       contains realistic elements in terms of diagnoses of what went wrong and why and
                                                             
         Anders Berg-Sørensen                                
         abs@ifs.ku.dk                                       
       1 University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen K 1353, Denmark
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        25 Page 2 of 4                        A. Berg-Sørensen
                                                             
       in terms of guidelines of what to do reforming institutions, organizational capacities,
       and resource distribution.                            
         Zakaras articulates the idea of equal freedom in chapter one and establishes the
       theoretical foundation for the diagnoses, discussions, and visions taken up in the
       following chapters. Aware that freedom is a contested concept potentially defined
       and used for different political purposes, Zakaras emphasizes that freedom means
       that one has the power to choose, follow one’s choice and be responsible for one’s
       choice. Freedom should be robust, based on internal capacities and resources, as well
       as external economic, natural, and social conditions. In Zakaras’ conception of free-
       dom, human agency and the reflexive use of power to make choices constitutes the
       focal point. This conception implies the cultivation of human capacities of reasoning,
       imagining, and judging and embraces the human condition of vulnerability, diversity,
       and conflict. Aiming at freedom for all, Zakaras refers to a thin theory of human
       flourishing based on a minimum of basic interests and conditions for human well-
       being and institutionalized by equal liberal rights, equal opportunities and access to
       resources, and mutual respect and recognition. In that sense, Zakaras develops an
       idea of a liberal society as a free and egalitarian society in need of reform strategies.
         This vision of a liberal society based on equal freedom stands in contrast to the
       existing American politics and society diagnosed and discussed in chapters two to
       five. Chapter two takes its point of departure in how liberalism developed as a politi-
       cal doctrine against tyranny and its arbitrary use of power and how the reemergence
       of authoritarian political leadership and concentration of power, economic and politi-
       cal, in the twenty-first century endangers a free society today. Radical liberalism
       takes up the thread of the liberal tradition against tyranny in its critique of power
       concentration and potential arbitrary use of power at presidential and governmental
       level as well as in administrative, bureaucratic, and corporate practices oppressing
       citizens and violating their rights. Liberal institutions of the rule of law, checks and
       balances, mechanism of accountability, citizen rights, free media, and an open and
       vibrant civil society counter the authoritarian tendencies in contemporary politics,
       although they are under threat of being corrupted or eliminated. However, Zakaras
       stands up for the liberal ideals, arguing for radical liberalism and reform strategies
       aiming at the dispersion of power among citizens.     
         Zakaras’ diagnoses of the challenges to a liberal democratic society focus on eco-
       nomic inequalities (chapter three), racial hierarchies (chapter four), and ecological
       destruction (chapter five). If the aim is equal freedom, the actual structural exploi-
       tation taking place at the competitive free market should undergo political reform.
       Global capitalism and the free market benefit the super-rich and create economic
       inequalities, poverty, deprivation and exploitation, not least exploitation of workers.
       The corporate elite adopts a liberal language of property rights, freedom of contract
       and individual freedom to justify this organization. However, according to Zakaras,
       there is another liberal idea of economic independence as precondition of personal
       freedom embedded in American political culture going back to the example of the
       small farmer in the nineteenth century who was associated in cooperatives and held
       economic power to set the market terms decentralized. This picture stands in contrast
       to the big corporate businesses and the exploitation of the labor force understand-
       ing exploitation as ‘taking unfair advantage of another person’s vulnerability’ (p.

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Freedom for All: what a liberal society could be Page 3 of 4 25
                                                             
       101). Zakaras’ reform strategies take the point of departure in this idea of fairness as
       expected in the nineteenth-century free-market interactions and contracts between
       persons who regard each other as equals and who are in a bargaining situation sup-
       porting their equal freedom.                          
         Another challenge to the liberal ideal of equal freedom are racial hierarchies and
       the four centuries of racial injustices in American political history. Racial hierarchies
       are structural barriers to freedom understood as the power to choose freely, and they
       still constitute racial biases in the criminal legal system, policing, the housing mar-
       ket, and the job market. Zakaras claims that radical liberalism acknowledges and
       addresses these racial injustices and guides reforms for a more free and egalitarian
       society in terms of equal opportunity, equal protection from domination, and equal
       recognition. The question in liberal political thinking is whether so-called colorblind
       liberalism contributes to upholding racial inequalities instead of promoting equal
       freedom. In the articulation of a liberalism committed to moral equality, the distinc-
       tion between the ideal of colorblindness and equal treatment as principles of a just
       society, on the one hand, and policies and strategies for promoting the ideals in a
       political context amending historical injustice, on the other, is crucial. It must pay
       attention to the lived experiences of those who are not free and the struggles against
       racial discrimination and for freedom from the abolitionist movement to the move-
       ment of black lives today. The history of liberalism with the gradual expansion of
       freedom and inclusion on equal terms reflects the commitment to moral equality,
       and this is an ongoing struggle. It speaks against contemporary anti-liberal voices
       promoting white supremacy and rejecting the rule of law, constitutional constraints,
       and the moral dignity of the person.                  
         Zakaras considers the ongoing ecological destruction caused by global capitalist
       and industrialist economies the greatest challenge humanity has ever faced and, thus
       the greatest threat to human freedom. This situation calls for political reforms and
       strategies for a sustainable economy and society protecting the natural environment.
       At the core of liberal political thought is the point of view that no one must act in a
       way that damages others’ freedom or the resources of others on which their freedom
       depends. Therefore, radical liberalism should also be sustainable liberalism, protect-
       ing life-sustaining natural resources to guarantee human well-being and agency over
       time, at present and in the future. In other words, the obligation to future generations
       requires a rethinking of liberal strategies and the establishing of new institutions to
       protect the vulnerable and a new organization of the economy to meet the ecological
       limits. According to Zakaras, this reimagining should take place within the frame-
       work of a liberal democracy, conditioning citizens’ engagement in innovation and
       creating incentives for green transition at all levels, local, national, and international.
         The radical liberalism articulated by Zakaras focuses on the dispersion of power
       and power-sharing among citizens. This kind of power-sharing liberalism stands in
       contrast to an elite-driven liberalism fearing the mobilization of citizens and uphold-
       ing the economic inequalities, racial hierarchies, and ecological degradation in the
       interests of the political and corporate elite. Zakaras’ Freedom for All contributes
       to the contemporary debate with a counterfactual vision for a future liberal society
       guided by the idea of an expansive equal freedom and a vibrant civil society cultivat-
       ing citizens as countervailing powers to the current authoritarian and tyrannical trends

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        25 Page 4 of 4                        A. Berg-Sørensen
                                                             
       in American politics and society and elsewhere in the liberal democratic world. A
       recurrent example of inspiration for radical liberalism is the so-called Nordic model.
       Although on another scale and with other proportions the diagnoses of contemporary
       economic, political, and social challenges in a liberal democratic society character-
       ized by inequalities and polarization would also apply in the Nordic countries. This
       could escalate despair in an already bleak time for liberal society, or it could encour-
       age more and stronger voices to defend hope in equal freedom. Freedom for All is an
       important and informed step in the continuous conversation about the future of liberal
       democracy and society.                                
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             