[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:5             
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00779-4            
       RESEARCH                                              
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the
       limits of democracy, parties and political participation
                                                             
                                                             
       Juan Roch1 · Daniel Balinhas2 · Aurelien Mondon3      
                                                             
       Received: 25 November 2024 / Accepted: 5 September 2025
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Public discourse about polarisation has become one of the latest hypes in politics,
       whether it is in the political sphere proper, the media, or academia. Much like the
       populist hype and anti-populist discourse that preceded it, this phenomenon has
       prompted some interesting and useful developments in understanding our reaction-
       ary context. However, it also risks obscuring certain trends by mislabelling them as
       polarisation. One consequence has been found in demands for a return to post-polit-
       ical technocratic management with a focus on ‘concrete issues’ and public policies.
       This, it is argued, will move the focus away from divisive and irrational demands
       by the ‘extremes’ and restore order. This article contends that this ‘polarisation
       narrative’ simplifies complex issues through a bad analogy: the construction of a
       spectrum where good should be found in the middle of diametrically opposed politi-
       cal positions. To address this, we develop a critique of this narrative and highlight
       its limitations by examining democracy, political parties, and political participation
       in the public sphere. Subsequently, in response to the diagnoses and proposals of
       the polarisation narrative, this article explores potential alternatives that offer new
       pathways for democratic expansion.                    
       Keywords Polarization · Narrative · Political parties · Public sphere · Democratic
       expansion                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Aurelien Mondon                                     
         am2124@bath.ac.uk                                   
         Juan Roch                                           
         jrochg@uoc.edu                                      
         Daniel Balinhas                                     
         Daniel.BalinhasPerez@ul.ie                          
       1 National University of Distance Education, Madrid, Spain
       2 University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland           
       3 University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 2 of 21                         J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       ‘Polarisation’ is often considered a key word to define our turbulent times. Indeed, it
       was made word of the year in 2023 by the Spanish Foundation FundeuRae and Mer-
       riam-Webster in 2024.1 This salience is echoed by a Nexis search of the term in the
       New York Times, which clearly demonstrates the rise of the term and its correlation
       with President Donald Trump’s ascendency in the United States (see Fig. 1). Strik-
       ingly, numbers not only rose steeply from 218 in 2015 to 496 in 2016, 694 in 2017,
       and a high of 841 in 2018, Trump himself is by far the most mentioned personality in
       the sample (present in over 2700 articles out of the 8008 articles sample). This trend
       can also be witnessed in academia with a sharp rise in articles whose titles include
       either ‘polarisation’ or ‘polarization’ from 2019 (see Fig. 2).
         We argue that rather than simply reflecting new political developments, polarisa-
       tion has been constructed and consolidated to shape our understanding of the world,
       which is what we call here the mainstream polarisation narrative. As such, it serves
       increasingly as one of the key terms to interpret current political problems, espe-
       cially regarding democracy. Indeed, the use of polarisation has become common in
       recent scholarly literature to explain the fundamental problems of today’s democracy,
       whether it is the rise of the far right, ‘backsliding’, dissatisfaction with democracy,
       ‘populism’ or wider social conflict (Klein, 2020; Orriols, 2023; Torcal, 2023; Miller,
       2023; Neil and O’Brian, 2024). The mainstream polarisation narrative often frames
       excessive voter affectivity as the core problem, portraying it as an ‘affective disease’
       that has ‘infected’ voters through ‘fake news’ and ‘populism’ and must be cured by
       returning them to rationality (see Arbatli and Rosenberg, 2021; Casal Bértoa and
       Rama, 2021; Torcal, 2023). As such, the ontology underlying the dangers posed by
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 1 Articles in the New York Times with ‘polarization’ (Nexis)
       1 See ‘Polarization: the word of the year 2023 according to FundéuRAE’.
                                                             
       h t t p s : / / f r a n c i s c o t o r r e b l a n c a . e s / e n / p o l a r i z a t i o n - t h e - w o r d - o f - t h e - y e a r - 2 0 2 3 - a c c o r d i n g - t o - f u n d e u r a e / and
       ‘2024 Word of the Year: Polarization’, h t t p s : / / w w w . m e r r i a m - w e b s t e r . c o m / w o r d p l a y / w o r d - o f - t h e - y e a r.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 3 of 21 5
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig. 2 Articles in social sciences with ‘polarisation’ or ‘polarization’ in the title (Web of Science)
                                                             
       polarisation is that of the ‘sovereign voter’, one who acts rationally and judges the
       costs and benefits of their vote.2                    
         One common recipe proposed to combat polarisation is a return to post-politi-
       cal technocratic management with a focus on ‘concrete issues’ and public policies
       (Miller, 2020, 2023). This, it is argued, will move the focus away from divisive ‘iden-
       tity politics’ and restore order. While it may sound like a reasonable attempt to engage
       with the state of polycrisis, this article contends that this approach to polarisation
       obscures our current context by simplifying complex issues through a bad analogy:
       the construction of a spectrum where good should be found in the middle of diametri-
       cally opposed and extreme political positions. This is problematic because restoring
       rationality in these terms risks promoting a return to indifference, apathy, and the
       absence of healthy political conflict (see Rancière, 1996; Mair, 2006). Furthermore, it
       leaves unaddressed the hegemonic structural and organisational dimensions of com-
       munication flows in capitalist societies (Williams, 2005 [1980]) and how inequality
       and marketisation are key driving forces to understand polarisation and the chal-
       lenges of democracy.                                  
         This article thus aims to unpack the discourses surrounding polarisation and key
       subdimensions of this narrative. We argue that carefully evaluating these dimen-
       sions—and their relationship to polarisation—is essential to fully understand the
       normative and political implications of how we conceptualise and respond to the
       challenges facing democracy. Contrary to the mainstream polarisation narrative, this
       article emphasises the often-overlooked role that political parties and mass organ-
       isations have historically played in advancing democratic inclusion. Likewise, we
       address the long-term market-driven concentration of the media in capitalist societ-
       2 This basic idea comes from Anthony Downs’ work An Economic Theory of Democracy (1957), in which
        he describes politics as the equivalent in its ambit of a commodity exchange.
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 4 of 21                         J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       ies, and the associated democratic struggles to construct new, emancipatory pub-
       lic spheres—both of which are essential to properly understanding contemporary
       polarisation.                                         
         In the following, we first trace the origins and meaning of what we term the main-
       stream polarisation narrative, comparing it in particular to the rise of populist and
       anti-populist discourse, which we argue had a similar function and impact. Secondly,
       we unpack this polarisation narrative by focusing on three main elements: the under-
       lying conception of democracy, the role of political parties, and political participation
       in the public sphere. Our main argument contends that this polarisation narrative can
       lead to a narrowed view of the current situation, thus preventing the urgent need for
       democratic expansion, which we turn to in the final section.
       From populism to the polarisation narrative           
                                                             
       While the use of polarisation has witnessed a revival, it has long been a subject of
       study, with Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba’s Civic Culture (1963) being amongst
       the first to offer an in-depth analysis. In the field of political science, a distinction
       has often been made between ideological polarisation and affective polarisation. The
       former refers to the ideological distance that exists between the parties competing in
       an election or the citizens based on their positions, and the latter relates to the degree
       of dislike towards those— parties, groups— holding opposing or distant positions
       (Kleinfeld, 2023, p. 20; Orriols, 2023, pp. 125–137).3 Despite the nuance provided
       by the most widely used measures (feeling thermometers and like-dislike scales)
       to assess the degree of citizens’ (dis)like towards different political groups (mainly
       parties), discourse about polarisation often slips into terms with greater normative
       connotations (i.e. hostility, prejudice) (i.e. Iyengar & Westwood, 2015; Rudolph &
       Hetherington, 2021).                                  
         Furthermore, the polarisation of political parties is correlated with citizen polarisa-
       tion (both affective and ideological). It is generally assumed that one of the factors
       explaining the increase in polarisation in contemporary societies is the importance
       of polarising political actors (new parties or radical movements), who are also often
       referred to as ‘populist’ as we explore below. Moreover, the development of social
       media and ‘new’ communication patterns is considered particularly relevant in the
       literature. This can be witnessed in research on the ‘echo chambers’ of digital com-
       munication, for example (Bennett & Kneuer, 2024; Al Atiqi, 2023). It is argued that
       citizens become increasingly trapped in closed, exclusive, and like-minded commu-
       3 It is particularly important here the use of ‘affective polarisation’, which is the type of political polari-
        sation that is more frequently associated with different social and democratic ills. However, separating
        the cognitive/ideological components of polarisation and the emotional/affective ones risks artificially
        separating two processes that go hand in hand, as previous literature has shown (see Simon et al., 2019).
        Indeed, within the polarisation literature, the link between ideological and affective polarisation has been
        consistently shown (Hernández et al., 2021; Orr et al., 2023). Furthermore, as stated by literature in social
        psychology, collective coordination in at least some values, beliefs or ways of life is a precondition for
        group formation in our societies (Quayle, 2025; Smith et al., 2024). Thus, what the polarisation narrative
        interprets as ‘tribalism’ or an irrational defence of a group or a political party driven by loyalty, is often
        actually driven by value-based, ideological or policy-based disagreements (Orr et al., 2023).

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 5 of 21 5
                                                             
       nities, an aspect that can lead to the narrowing and radicalisation of their opinion and
       worldview. For example, respondents in the U.S. claim to experience more negative
       emotions towards those in distant ideological positions than in the time of Almond
       and Verba’s book (1963) (see Iyengar et al., 2019; Druckman et al., 2022).
         Yet, we contend that the current focus on polarisation is hyped, and that the prem-
       ises and normative implications underlying this focus and research agenda are often
       insufficiently examined and clarified. While polarisation may play a role in illuminat-
       ing some political trends, its uncritical use often exaggerates its novelty, significance
       and spread and in turn obscures other trends or issues. We understand ‘hype’ the way
       Glynos and Mondon (2019) defined it with regards to populism:
         ‘The term “populist hype” captures the way politicians, as well as journalists and
       academic commentators: (1) exaggerate the significance of populism through the
       sheer volume of content devoted to its discussion; (2) present a simplistic picture of
       the “rise” of populism (with that “rise” feeding and legitimizing the hype) …; and
       (3) exaggerate the political and societal impact of populism per se (to the detriment
       of the substantive ideologies of different populist actors), usually by characterizing
       populism as such as an acute threat to democracy (Goyvaerts et al., 2024, p. 532)’.
         Therefore, by polarisation hype, we do not argue that the use of the term itself
       is automatically useless, problematic, or even an exaggeration in precise and thor-
       ough discussion and analysis, but that its careless overuse is unhelpful if it obscures
       other political processes. This is therefore similar to populist hype, where the threat
       of populism takes the shape of populist leaders followed by gullible peoples who
       threaten the liberal status quo by portraying the world in a Manichean and captious
       manner (see Roch, 2024 for a critique). To put it simply, anti-populist discourse sug-
       gests that populists lie or manipulate citizens and distort normal information flows
       that are the basis for a healthy public sphere in liberal democracies. Populism is thus
       often described as a viral disease that spreads and gradually infects democracy with
       its symptoms (Taggart, 2004; Müller, 2016; Serrano Zamora, 2022).
         While populism remains ubiquitous in public discourse in the 2020 s, we argue
       that it has become complemented with the polarisation narrative, both aiming to cap-
       ture key threats to liberal democracy. Echoing research on the use of populism in the
       media and academia (Brown & Mondon, 2020; Hunger & Paxton, 2021), a study
       of the media’s use of the term polarisation in Spain (Porto Requejo, 2023) noted ‘a
       possible abuse of the term by the media’ and confirmed the word polarisation as a
       keyword, which plays an essential role in political and media discourse and helps to
       define the current social and cultural context’. Interestingly, the most frequent meta-
       phors associated with the term polarisation in the media are those of disease and virus
       (p. 236). Therefore, building on the disease metaphor, the category of populism has
       served as a first warning to drive out the ‘savage other’ that came to infect us with
       their populist ideology, while the category of polarisation assumes that ‘the other’
       has already infected us: as citizens or as a political system, we are all polarized to a
       greater or lesser degree. The solution is no longer as simple as expelling the ‘popu-
       lists’, but rather to be found in the need for de-radicalisation of political demands and
       the return towards more consensual politics.          
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 6 of 21                         J. Roch et al.
       Decoupling polarisation from a harmful polarisation narrative
                                                             
       We argue that, much like populism, polarisation, as a concept carefully defined and
       applied, can shed some light on the state and evolution of inter-group relations. Along
       these lines, there are different – though minoritarian – contributions within the polari-
       sation literature that understand and analyse the latter as a process that is linked to
       broader historical, socioeconomic, and political dynamics (e.g. Balinhas & Tileaga,
       2025; Comellas and Torcal, 2025; Roch, 2025; Hübscher et al., 2023; Röllicke, 2023;
       Rothers, 2025). Among these contributions, Smith et al.’s (2024) approach envisages
       polarisation as a process that emerges through communication and the cut and thrust
       of social interaction. They argue that it is through everyday human interaction that
       shared beliefs, emotions and common ways to act upon the world come together to
       (re)produce group identities with political significance. These opinion-based groups
       and identities become meaningful through a differentiation with perceived outgroups
       whose values or beliefs are seen as incompatible.     
         This process of inter-group differentiation, usually involving both value-based
       (i.e. ideological, issue-based) and affective polarisation constitutes a foundation for
       citizens’ collective engagement and collective action (Simon et al., 2019; Smith et al.,
       2024). Bearing this in mind, it is not surprising that negative inter-group emotions are
       common individual-level predictors of collective action, or that more recently, affec-
       tive polarisation has been found to be a predictor of collective action too (Bettarelli et
       al., 2022). Following this rationale of polarisation as a process, ‘polarisation’ would
       not be in and of itself a societal problem, but a social-psychological process that
       underpins group creation and the struggles of particular groups to produce some sort
       of social change. This change, depending on the substantive contents of the ‘pola-
       rising’ political actors, could lead to more inclusive and democratic societies and
       thereby, to democratic expansion, or to more exclusive societies and thus to demo-
       cratic erosion. Therefore, the normative value of specific instances of ‘polarisation’
       needs to be evaluated in context, not as an abstract moral category that is to blame for
       the different problems that liberal democracies are experiencing.
         Yet the widespread use of the term by academics, media, politicians and pundits
       has contributed to the reification of the concept of polarisation, which is now com-
       monly treated as an objective feature of our political era and assumed to be inher-
       ently detrimental to democracy – despite the fact that empirical evidence linking
       polarisation to democratic erosion remains inconclusive (see Broockman et al., 2023;
       Voelkel et al., 2023). Mainstream polarisation literature treats polarisation as a static,
       a-contextual and self-contained problem, which is often framed as a threat to demo-
       cratic stability, normally citing low-intensity examples such as institutional gridlock
       and high-intensity examples implying the erosion of democratic norms (Arbatli and
       Rosenberg, 2021; Piazza, 2023). These approaches create an illusion of explanation
       for democratic backsliding, ignoring other, more significant processes at play.
         This is why we argue that the wider, broad-brush use of ‘polarisation’ is not only
       inaccurate but prevents a serious analysis of the state of democracy today and its
       current shortcomings, instead serving to legitimise and reinforce the existing liberal
       order (see Druckman et al., 2022; Casal Bértoa and Rama, 2021). In the following
       sections, we unpack the key concepts and implications embedded in the polarisation

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 7 of 21 5
                                                             
       narrative, with particular attention to the notions of democracy, political parties, and
       the public sphere.                                    
       Polarisation and democracy                            
                                                             
       The fear of the masses and the polarisation narrative 
                                                             
       The role of ‘the people’ in the quasi-democracies of the late nineteenth and early
       twentieth centuries was highly contested. While the nascent liberal elite had played
       a central role in the various revolutions and reforms which took place from the eigh-
       teenth century in wresting power away from the arbitrary rule of absolute monarchs
       and emperors, as well as religious institutions, they remained broadly suspicious of
       ‘the people’ as a whole and feared the power of the masses (Wood, 2012, 2016). The
       latter was characterised by leading thinkers as atavism and uncontrolled emotional-
       ity, thus provoking individuals’ descent into irrationality (Le Bon, 1963 [1895]). This
       explains why the rise of the mass party, which facilitated the entry of ‘the people’ in the
       bourgeois political structures, was often considered as disrupting (see, for instance,
       Ostrogorsky, 1902). For obvious reasons, the demands of the masses clashed directly
       with those of the capitalist class, as the former demanded the rights promised by the
       revolutions and reforms to be enacted and expanded rather than vaguely gestured at.
       Rather than acknowledging the deeply undemocratic nature of the bourgeois liberal
       democratic settlement, the problem was pinned on ‘the people’ who disturbed sen-
       sible, rational deliberation processes. Wealth and science became the replacement
       for the arbitrary power of the old regimes based on blood and/or religion (Rancière,
       2007). A ‘semi-sovereign people’ (Mair, 2006) were given some say, but ultimately
       were expected to peacefully submit to the will of those who know and must lead.
       With the fall of the Soviet bloc and the apparent ‘end of history’, it seemed that peace
       had been reached at last. Mass parties and class mobilisation fell into irrelevance,
       and ‘the people’ could turn to depoliticised consumption and individual fulfilment.
       What we saw emerging was ‘a notion of democracy that is being steadily stripped of
       its popular component—democracy without a demos’ (Mair, 2006). Politics and its
       antagonism were no longer useful, all that was needed was policing, that is, manag-
       ing the status quo (Rancière, 1996). This was short-lived, and cracks soon appeared
       in the post-political order as ‘really existing liberalism’ (Finlayson, 2012) failed to
       fulfil the aspirations of the people and capitalism their basic needs, let alone hopes.
       At first, the backlash was mistaken, consciously or not, as ‘populism’ as discussed
       in the previous section. We argue here that the polarisation narrative indicates more
       precisely than the populism one what its virtuous opposite is and how we should deal
       with the ‘disease’. According to this narrative, the main problem of modern represen-
       tation is the lack of or departure from ‘reasonable’ deliberation and decision-making:
       there is too much politics and not enough police (Rancière, 1996). Deliberation can
       be understood as the process by which various actors enter into a creative discussion
       through the use of persuasion and agreement (see Habermas, 1984; Manin, 1997;
       198; Risse, 2000). Polarisation prevents this and this oft-considered pillar of mod-
       ern representation must be recovered: we must learn to deliberate again and act like
       grown-ups, something which is also core to anti-populist discourse. To achieve this,

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 8 of 21                         J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       the typical advice for ensuring good deliberation is depersonalization and discussion
       about concrete and limited matters. This implies, on one side, a compromise to stay
       away from more ideological and systemic arguments, and on the other, striving for
       conciliation and consensus. In a nutshell, politicians and citizens must change their
       language and deliberate about public policies rather than confront divergent identities
       and ideologies (Miller, 2023; Torcal, 2023).          
                                                             
       The ‘good old times’ of deliberation: rational citizens or silent,
       depoliticised citizens?                               
                                                             
       The polarisation narrative urges an individual exercise of self-correction and toler-
       ance to increase deliberative capacity (Orriols, 2023, p. 126). This idea has become
       increasingly common as a trope in liberal circles, as exemplified by popular media
       gimmicks such as the Guardian’s ‘Dining across the divide’ series and its tagline:
       ‘Can breaking bread together help bridge political differences?’4 However, this view
       rests on overly simplistic assumptions, as the emphasis on individual virtues as a
       remedy for polarisation overlooks—or intentionally obscures—the deeper political
       dynamics and structural contradictions at play.       
         Yet arguments around the need to overcome polarisation and return to a state of
       depoliticised management of democracy are widespread and powerful. President
       Joe Biden’s election speech in 2020 was a model in this sense as he pledged ‘to be
       a president who seeks not to divide but to unify’,5 contrasting with the polarising
       politics of Trump. Biden went on to read from the polarisation playbook, stating
       that ‘It’s time to put away the harsh rhetoric. To lower the temperature. To see each
       other again. To listen to each other again … To make progress, we must stop treating
       our opponents as our enemy. We are not enemies. We are Americans’. The African
       American community got a special mention for ‘[standing] up again for [Biden]’, yet
       this was qualified by the newly elected president, who thanked absolutely everyone
       for his election: ‘I am proud of the coalition we put together, the broadest and most
       diverse in history. Democrats, Republicans, and independents … Progressives, mod-
       erates, and conservatives. Young and old. Urban, suburban, and rural. Gay, straight,
       transgender. White. Latino. Asian. Native American’. In his attempt at reconciliation
       and national healing, Biden lumped together the many communities at the sharp end
       of Trump’s politics with those who had supported said exclusionary politics. While
       it may have sounded reassuring after the first Trump presidency to those who had
       not been directly affected, it proved incredibly misjudged in hindsight, considering
       the events of 6 January 2021 and the storming of the Capitol by a mob encouraged
       by Trump, who had clearly no care for democracy, healing, or deliberation. Worse,
       the lead-up to the 2024 election has shown that Biden’s reconciliatory approach did
       4 See the section of the Guardian ‘Dining across the divide. Can breaking bread together help bridge
        political differences?’ h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / l i f e a n d s t y l e / s e r i e s / d i n i n g - a c r o s s - t h e - d i v i d e.
       5 See the article ‘‘This is the time to heal’: Joe Biden addresses Americans in election victory speech’, 8
        November, 2020, h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / u s - n e w s / 2 0 2 0 / n o v / 0 7 / j o e - b i d e n - s p e e c h - u s - e l e c t i o n - w i n
        - k a m a l a - h a r r i s.                         
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 9 of 21 5
                                                             
       nothing to appease Trump and his supporters or address their increasingly far-right
       politics and positioning.                             
         Similar arguments to Biden’s have been made with regards to the rise of far right
       politics in Europe. This was particularly explicit in France after President Emmanuel
       Macron called a snap election following the Rassemblement National victory in the
       2024 European Elections. The president’s strategy was to equate both the far-right
       party and the new popular union on the left (which spanned all parties from the
       centre left —including Francois Hollande, hardly a revolutionary— to the far left)
       as two sides of the same polarising coin. The line was even pushed by the French
       male football team’s captain Kylian Mbappé during the Euros, as he asked for French
       people to vote ‘against the extremes’ as if a moderate social democratic programme
       was equivalent to a far right one.6 In the United Kingdom, Sir Keir Starmer ran a
       campaign based on his record of purging his party and programme of any trace of lef-
       twing politics: ‘Labour is for everyone’ but, as his record in government has shown,
       mostly right-wing voters, regardless of their views, demands, and the threats they
       pose to many communities Labour should protect.7      
         What has become clear with this narrative is that more often than not, and even
       though false equivalences are created between the left and the far right, it is the
       former that ends up being painted as the real threat, while the latter can be accom-
       modated. This could be seen in calls for Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni and Macron
       to overcome their differences and ‘join forces to save Europe’ and for ‘Centrists and
       pragmatic right-wing parties could at least compromise on the most urgent global
       threats’.8 This opinion piece in the Guardian is particularly symptomatic of the stage
       of mainstreaming of far-right politics we have now reached (Brown, 2024; Newth et
       al., 2025). Not only is Meloni’s far-right party, which not so long ago boasted about
       its fascist roots (Brown & Newth, 2024), euphemised as a ‘pragmatic right-wing’
       party, but it is welcomed as a solution to polarisation, the very crisis invented to
       exclude the far right originally. The mask fully slips in the conclusion: ‘As the Euro-
       pean elections become polarised, could it be a post-ideological compromise instead
       that benefits voters by driving the next round of European integration?’. A similar
       move was witnessed as Starmer praised Meloni’s handling of immigration.9 This has
       made it all too clear that the problem was never polarisation or even far-right politics,
       6 See the article ‘France captain Kylian Mbappé urges vote against rising ‘extremes’ in election’, 17 June,
        2024, h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / f o o t b a l l / a r t i c l e / 2 0 2 4 / j u n / 1 7 / k y l i a n - m b a p p e - f r e n c h - e l e c t i o n - c o m m e
        n t - e u r o - 2 0 2 4 - f r a n c e - v o t e - a g a i n s t - e x t r e m e s.
       7 See the article ‘It’s time to end the UK’s divisions: Labour is for everyone’, 4 May 2024:
       h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / p o l i t i c s / a r t i c l e / 2 0 2 4 / m a y / 0 4 / i t s - t i m e - t o - e n d - t h e - u k s - d i v i s i o n s - l a b o u r - i s - f o
       r - e v e r y o n e.                                  
       8 See the article ‘Macron and Meloni appear poles apart – but what if they joined forces to save Europe?’,
        6 June 2024.                                         
       h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / c o m m e n t i s f r e e / a r t i c l e / 2 0 2 4 / j u n / 0 6 / m a c r o n - a n d - m e l o n i - a p p e a r - p o l e s - a p a r
       t - b u t - w h a t - i f - t h e y - j o i n e d - f o r c e s - t o - s a v e - e u r o p e.
       9 See the article ‘Starmer ‘very interested’ in Italy’s plan to offshore asylum applications in Albania, says
        Meloni – as it happened’, 16 September 2024, h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / p o l i t i c s / l i v e / 2 0 2 4 / s e p / 1 6 / k
        e i r - s t a r m e r - g i o r g i a - m e l o n i - i m m i g r a t i o n - u k - p o l i t i c s - l i v e.

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 10 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       but the challenge to the status quo. If the former accepts not to threaten the latter and
       politicisation is put back in its box, all is well.   
         Hence, the polarisation narrative conceals that the problem of deliberation is more
       complex than simply allowing technocratic politicians who see their role as managers
       of democracy to get on with their job. If we look beyond the current hype surround-
       ing polarisation, we do not uncover a previously deliberative subject silenced by
       recent divides. Rather, we find a subject that had long remained unheard—excluded
       from the public sphere, where access to traditional media was historically uneven,
       obstructed by structural barriers and powerful gatekeepers. The heyday of democracy
       was not a society where consensus was politely found on key issues, as proponents
       of the polarisation narratives argue, but one where ideas were contested radically.
       The aim was not to search for a middle ground, but for a better society, whatever that
       meant for the proponents. Grown-up deliberation is not a testament to the quality of
       the democratic workings, but rather a clear sign of the depoliticisation of the people
       and public arena.                                     
         The mainstream polarisation narrative, therefore, does not aim to bring us back to
       a state of democratic engagement, but rather it serves to protect the liberal hegemony
       by defusing any attempt at challenging it through repoliticisation. This takes place
       through a dual movement. First, it posits liberalism as a bulwark against the far right
       as the historical threat to what is good, building on the trauma of the Second World
       War and the historiography which constructed the west and liberalism as the saviour,
       ignoring their complacency and complicity in the rise of fascism and other atrocities
       both preceding and following it (Mondon, 2024). Second, it prevents any discussion
       of alternatives on the left by creating a horseshoe theory whereby the threat posed by
       the left, no matter how moderate, is considered as equally dangerous or unrealistic
       as that posed by the far right. We argue that this leads to a mainstreaming of far-right
       politics through its equation with the left, as it becomes posited as an alternative to
       a deeply distrusted status quo and euphemised and legitimised by populist hype in
       particular. Therefore, in these circumstances, the threat to democracy is not polarisa-
       tion in and of itself, but the use of the concept to flatten opposition to really existing
       liberalism and prevent an open political discussion of the state of polycrisis.
       Polarisation and political parties: On partisan (mis)perceptions, the
       symmetry of intolerance thesis and its alleged solutions
       Now that we have outlined some issues at the broadest level (democracy), we turn to
       a more precise focus on parties and supporters. While many of the elements discussed
       here relate directly to the previous section, this level plays a particular role in limit-
       ing both the understanding of democracy to and within electoral systems and, even
       further, to only some views and actors within said system.
         Partisanship, that is, individuals’ identification with a political party, is one of
       the core concepts around which the affective expression of polarisation (i.e. affec-
       tive polarisation) is based, at least in the key literature. By this token, Iyengar et al.
       (2012, p. 407), based on the US context, contend that ‘the mere’ act of identifying
       with a political party is enough to prompt negative feelings towards the out-party. In
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 11 of 21 5
                                                             
       the same vein, Torcal (2023) argues that parties generate mega-identities that blur
       the rational view of voters. Partisanship would involve both an instrumental (i.e.
       rational) and an expressive (i.e. emotional) component (Huddy, Mason and Aarøe,
       2015; Hartman et al., 2022). On the one hand, the instrumental component is marked
       by individual evaluations regarding whether parties’ proposals might be congruent
       with their interests and principles. On the other, the expressive component envis-
       ages partisanship as a subjective sense of belonging that implies the search for posi-
       tive differentiation of the in-group -party in this case- from the out-groups (Tajfel &
       Turner, 1979). Individuals, due to this subjective sense of belonging and an inter-
       nalised attachment to a party/group, would strive to protect and achieve a positive
       ingroup status.                                       
         Thus the polarisation narrative generally mobilises a notion of partisanship as a
       source of biases, nourished and spread by new communication paradigms and social
       networks’ algorithms that foster the creation of echo chambers, and privilege highly
       negative, confrontative, and emotionally charged communication. Furthermore, this
       is incentivised by the increasingly uncivil behaviour of the political elites, who seem
       to be motivated to foster a ‘tribalist’ defence of their party organisations. Following
       this rationale, negativity towards a political outgroup would stem from biased percep-
       tions and meta-perceptions (Moore-berg et al., 2020; Druckman et al., 2022).10 That
       is, a good deal of the political polarisation we are currently witnessing would stem
       from entrenched party identities and an almost irrational defence of the ingroups.
       By this token, Torcal (2023) talks about party supporters becoming ‘hooligans’ and
       Mason (2015) talks about ‘uncivil agreement’ in order to express the idea that current
       levels of political conflict and affective polarisation have weak correlations to ‘sub-
       stantive’ ideological or policy-based differences (see also Svolik, 2019).
         Additionally, party supporters on both sides of the ideological spectrum with the
       most inaccurate misperceptions and meta-perceptions of the ‘political others’ would
       be precisely those more politically active, and those that locate themselves closer to
       the ideological extremes of the left-right continuum, thereby being the ones whose
       contribution to the lack of political compromise and the decreasing quality of deliber-
       ation and consensual politics is larger. Contrarily, those with more moderate ideologi-
       cal positions seem to hold weaker biases, so they can ‘judge’ better. Linking this with
       the moral panics that tend to follow polarisation studies, ‘radicals’ on both the left
       and the right are putting in jeopardy some of the mainstays of (liberal) democracy.
         Departing from these conceptions of political parties and partisanship, de-polari-
       sation is deemed as both necessary and based on the principles of intergroup contact
       (Allport, 1954), as it can lead to de-biasing and improving the quality of delibera-
       tion. Dining across the divide, having a beer with a supporter of a political group
       we disagree with, fostering civil conversations between people with opposite views,
       the search for compromises, and the public performances of warmth between party
       elites are all examples of different types of contact which would help ‘de-polarise’.
       Furthermore, the political discourse of party elites in campaigning or public debates
       10 In psychology, metaperceptions refer to how people think others perceive them. Applied to political
       groups, it means how members of one political group believe others—whether from opposing groups or
       the general public—view their group.                  

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 12 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       is deemed crucial to revert polarisation and the dominant literature on the topic rec-
       ommends a focus on public policy rather than to refer to identities grouping political
       preferences (Miller, 2020, 2023).                     
         While this conceptual framework has certain merits—since civility and dialogue
       between opposing ideological views are not inherently negative—it also presents fun-
       damental shortcomings and implicitly (re)produces underlying ideological assump-
       tions. Among them, the polarisation narrative tends to presuppose that there is a
       ‘correct’ and ‘accurate’ way to perceive a social or political group and its ideological
       values. Even more problematic, it claims that there is an intrinsic negative potential
       in the passionate engagement with collective action and the feeling of belonging to
       an in-group. It thus disincentivises collective actor engagement, which has been one
       of the pillars of democratic expansion.               
         Under the polarisation narrative, groups and political parties, in particular, are
       seen in their limited role as an aggregation of individual preferences. Mobilising
       collective identities is seen as potentially dangerous and a distortion of good poli-
       tics (Miller, 2023). Thus, a political party in its virtuous form must be a platform to
       aggregate, simplify, organise, and communicate individual preferences; that is, to
       facilitate social election by citizens (Kitschelt, 2004). This is why the polarisation
       narrative recommends focusing aseptically on public policy, which is very limited in
       its understanding of politics and power, while ignoring fundamental potentials of a
       political party and, more generally, a political organisation or group, as well as their
       impact on democracy.                                  
         Therefore, the mainstream polarisation narrative overlooks fundamental facets of
       party politics as vehicles of democratisation. First, it disregards the historical role of
       party politics as collective organisations that have served to represent marginalised
       voices and groups (Katz & Mair, 2014, p. 351). Second, party organisations are plat-
       forms not only to represent but also to mobilise excluded groups and identities and
       allow for their self-expression and self-organisation (Von Beyme, 1985, p. 16). In
       fact, democratisation has been closely linked to the development of mass political
       organisations, especially in the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth cen-
       tury. The departure from a restricted parliamentarism to party democracy (Manin,
       1997) implied universal suffrage and the expansion of political participation. These
       dynamics of social mobilisation and democratisation were based on a redefinition
       and expansion of the “we”, the legitimate demos (Rancière, 1996, pp. 66–67), since
       different narratives struggle to define how a given group ‘really’ is and how this
       group and its demands should be treated (Tileaga, 2014).
         Many contemporary political struggles are precisely struggles for hegemony in
       which specific social representations of different political groups are at play. Conse-
       quently, it is possible to identify a democratising polarisation that, by including and
       bringing up new identities and cleavages (Lipset & Rokkan, 1990), or reactivating
       old ones, increases both polarisation and paves the way for mass movements advo-
       cating the expansion of democracy. Hence, the recommendations that are frequently
       associated with the polarisation narrative to favour an aseptic and technocratic role
       for a political party should be reconsidered. If we do not want to throw the baby out
       with the bathwater, we need to identify, separate, and even defend the democratis-
       ing polarisation of mass organisations. Of course, as already argued, this must be

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 13 of 21 5
                                                             
       carefully distinguished from reactionary politics that indeed represent a reaction to
       democratic expansion rather than a radical break from the status quo.
                                                             
       Polarisation, political participation, and the public sphere
                                                             
       As we have discussed above, the polarisation narrative emphasises the need for a
       deliberative turn to counter the democratic decline in contemporary societies. But
       how is such deliberation conceived? How are the subjects of deliberation and the
       arena in which it takes place imagined? In the mainstream polarisation narrative,
       political deliberation tends to be conceived as the rational and critical exchange of
       information about public policy and the absence of identitarian markers or emotional
       attachments (see Torcal, 2023; Miller, 2023). This view stems from the Habermasian
       (1993[1962]) conception of the public sphere as the space mediating between state
       and civil society, where matters of public concern are exposed and discussed from a
       critical and deliberative standpoint. Departing from this reasoning, the polarisation
       narrative identifies social conflict and emotional bonds as serious challenges for a
       proper deliberation in the public sphere.             
         Likewise, recent literature has turned its attention to the spread of disinformation
       and fake news as one of the crucial threats to a healthy public sphere (Vallespín,
       2021, p. 16; Bennett & Kneuer, 2024). Echo chambers would be the digital version of
       the polarisation denounced by Habermas in the sixties, as they reproduce identitarian
       bubbles in the digital space, separating individuals and preventing their communica-
       tion and rational exchange. In responding to this narrative of polarisation, it is crucial
       to first question the underlying assumption of a singular public sphere—one that
       appears ‘out of the blue’ and is presumed to be neutral and symmetrical by nature.
         The history of the public sphere is a history of exclusion and the construction of a
       sphere of legitimation of the capitalist socioeconomic order. As Fraser put it (1990),
       the ideal of the liberal public sphere as unified, transparent, and neutral is contested
       by the disruption of multiple self-organised and alternative public spheres (see also
       Thompson (1966 [1963], pp. 419–423). Therefore there have always been competing
       public spheres derived from several exclusions and the attempt of appropriation of
       the public sphere to legitimise the status quo. Importantly, the liberal public sphere,
       since its inception, has had a class character facilitating coordination for market oper-
       ations and expansion (see Negt & Kluge, 1993 [1972]). 
         The second problem with the Habermasian conception of the public sphere is
       related to the conditions of deliberation and whether it is desirable or even possible
       to enter the public sphere bracketing previous social differences and social identities
       related to status, class, or gender. According to Thompson (1966 [1963], p. 423),
       the plebeian public spheres had a clear difference with respect to the liberal one.
       The plebeian spheres were built around the commons, the interdependencies between
       individuals in relation to their needs and values in life. Even before the socialist
       movement began to grow on the basis of this type of plebeian associationism, the
       Christian tradition had already hinted towards collectivism and concern for the life
       conditions and identities of others. Hence, the neutral character of the liberal public
       sphere is political and contingent on the particular interests of the dominant classes.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 14 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
                                                             
         The question is whether we still have a restricted and exclusionary public sphere.
       In contemporary liberal democracies, everybody can be potentially included in the
       public sphere, or so we are told. Yet we argue that an asymmetry remains, and access
       is in fact far from even, in terms of class and other elements of discrimination based
       on entrenched power structures. As Raymond Williams explains, the history of the
       media and public spheres can never be a decontextualized technical history. The vari-
       ous media, artefacts, and technologies that serve to connect and integrate individuals
       in a given society emerge in the historical context ‘of the general development of
       the productive forces and of social orders and bonds’ (2005 [1980], pp. 37–39). In
       this vein, the polarisation narrative tends to associate current problems exclusively
       with characteristics of social media and ignores the fact that they have deeper roots
       in the way the media landscape changed in the twentieth century. Core is the issue of
       ownership concentration and the relationship between media and capital, first seen
       in television and traditional mass media (see Bagdikian, 2004). This ownership con-
       centration remains central in the age of digital media. Generally speaking, the turn to
       the digital platform economy has led to an increased concentration of ownership of
       digital communication flows (and all the associated economic and value production)
       comparable to the era of the large television conglomerates (Thompson, 1998, p. 109;
       Bagdikian, 2004; Cioffi et al., 2022).                
         In addition to the property issue, not all sociopolitical groups have the same mate-
       rial means, legitimacy, and capacity to spread and (re)produce narratives about how
       society works, what the main problems are, and how we should face them. Some
       needs/demands are given more space in the media, directly impacting policy priori-
       ties. Meanwhile, the manifold subaltern subjects’ subjectivities, desires, and needs
       can rarely be spoken for (Spivak, 1988), and when they are, it tends to be from the
       lens of the privileged. Indeed, many struggles for equality and recognition (e.g. femi-
       nism, antiracist or decolonial movements…), apart from fighting for equal access to
       material means necessary for life, often incorporate a challenge to the ways histori-
       cally disadvantaged and marginalised groups have been depicted.
         Therefore, the desired goal of the mainstream polarisation narrative to guarantee
       proper deliberation should require a deep analysis of the origins and nature of the
       public sphere, which does not merely depend on the aggregated predispositions or
       attitudes of individuals. It is necessary to include a proper account of the nature and
       structure of the public spheres, how they are (re)produced in the first instance, and
       if the current conditions allow for a proper democratic debate. In this context, it is
       pertinent to question: Is deliberation and finding the ‘virtuous middle point’ desirable
       when the public sphere and the opinions that are frequently heard and disseminated
       are clearly skewed towards one side of the spectrum and an uncritical defence of the
       status quo?                                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 15 of 21 5
       Expanding democracy: limits and alternatives to the polarisation
       narrative                                             
                                                             
       Positive social change involving democratic expansion has usually been based on
       the radical politicisation of oppressions that were deemed as normal or natural. Col-
       lective action, as one of the main ways leading to positive social change (Reicher,
       2012), is favoured by cognitive-ideological aspects such as the evaluation of specific
       unjust situations. At the same time, situations of injustice often lead to feelings of
       moral outrage and anger that are also key in motivating citizens to participate in
       collective action (Simon, 2020; Van Zomeren et al., 2008). Collective action implies
       the emergence of publicly recognised forms of conflict. In fact, political conflict and
       polarisation have often been at the basis of the defence of democracy, which histori-
       cally required an unequivocal denunciation of politics that curtail democracy itself or
       the equal rights of some.                             
         This is no less the case in a context of democratic struggle in capitalist societies in
       which inequality, exclusion, and alienation are core to the system. The mainstream
       polarisation narrative typically assumes a causal chain that begins with polarisation
       and ends with democratic erosion, but this directionality is unconvincing. A more
       plausible alternative is to consider the inverse: current levels of polarisation and con-
       flict might be seen as a consequence – or perhaps both a cause and consequence – of
       ongoing and historical democratic erosion under capitalism and more strongly under
       its neoliberal mutation (Wood, 2016; Stavrakakis, 2018). The last decades of impo-
       sition of the neoliberal logic within liberal democracies have led to an erosion of
       sovereignty and equality, alongside the institutionalisation of dubiously democratic
       practices since the 1970 s, and even more so since the 1990 s (Harvey, 2005).
         During this period, polarisation has intensified, while fundamental rights like
       access to housing, education, healthcare, or even the ‘right to the city’ no longer
       guaranteed for expanding sectors of the citizenry (see Di Masso, 2012; Harvey, 2008;
       Lefebvre, 1968; Moulaert et al., 2001). These inequalities tend to be ‘spatialised’,
       often leading to socio-spatial segregation. Given these growing trends in inequality
       and segregation, it should not be surprising that many are increasingly angry and
       opposed to politics-as-usual. In other words, is it surprising that societies that have
       become more unequal and fragmented are progressively becoming more – ideologi-
       cally and affectively – polarised, especially when the different issues brought about
       by this inequality and fragmentation become politicised (see Balinhas, 2023; Simon,
       2020)? Is it surprising that already polarised societies in terms of their social organ-
       isation provide a breeding ground for the emergence of political antagonism?
         We argue that it is not, and more importantly, we contend that bottom-up polari-
       sation can be positive for democracy. In other words, the ability for those excluded
       to become vocal political subjects is essential in a democracy worthy of the name.
       Hence, polarisation can be positive and is, in fact, unavoidable in our current predica-
       ment. Yet it must not be seen a priori as a symmetrical continuum of positions on both
       extremes, as it often implies an imbalanced struggle between those excluded sectors
       and the dominant classes in capitalist societies. Mainstream understandings of polari-
       sation force us instead to embrace the ‘horseshoe theory’ and tend to obscure this
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 16 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
                                                             
       imbalanced struggle between the many excluded and the few privileged by equating
       them with the elitist and anti-democratic politics found on the far right.
         A further twist that we need to add to this line of argument is that while processes
       of democratic expansion, in their dynamics of contestation of the status quo tend to
       require and/or produce at least some degree of polarisation, as is clear from historical
       evidence on labour rights, racial/gender equality etc., democratic erosion does not
       require conflict and polarisation. In this sense, the documented erosion of different
       mainstays of liberal democracies in the west (e.g. equality, rights, people’s sover-
       eignty) started and developed with special intensity from the 90 s onwards under rule
       of centre-left and centre-right parties that embraced a consensus under an unques-
       tioned neoliberal economic rationale – that is, a lack of polarisation – long before
       so-called ‘populist’ parties grew in support (see Crouch, 2004; Mair, 2006). This
       calls our attention to how ‘really existing liberalism’ (Mondon, 2024), through an
       elite-level consensus, has been co-existing with dynamics of (post)colonialism, rac-
       ism, and exclusion, as well as the limitation of people’s sovereignty in favour of
       the market’s interests. It is thus precisely the neoliberal technocratic consensus and
       lack of contestation which has brought us to the current point of mainstreaming of
       reactionary politics and the politics of exclusion, and this is something that should be
       considered before ahistorical and a-contextual calls for ‘depolarisation’ as a univer-
       sally desirable policy goal.                          
         What links instances of democratic backsliding in the west is not polarisation per
       se, but a (neo)conservative backlash that capitalises on the broken promises of the
       liberal status quo and the performance of really existing liberalism in the last decades.
       Thus we argue that the essential question that researchers, journalists, and policy-
       makers need to ask themselves is what political purposes polarisation serves, for
       whom, and under what conditions. Understanding polarisation in this way enables us
       to distinguish between democratic contestations of the status quo and anti-democratic
       reactions, rather than collapsing both under the same label of ‘polarisation’. Often,
       far from being the problem, polarisation may be a democratic necessity, a means
       through which organized groups articulate alternatives and resist domination core to
       a system that is often only democratic by name.       
         Likewise, to equip ourselves for the necessary social conflict and politicisation in
       democracy, we need to put forward alternative views on party and mass organisa-
       tion as well as political communication in the public sphere, different from those
       mobilised by the mainstream polarisation narrative. Reducing collective identity and
       collective organisations, such as mass parties, to intrinsic hate-based feelings of in-
       group/out-group relations serves to disarm popular classes in capitalist societies. For
       the coordination of the many is absolutely necessary to build bridges and platforms
       through big collective organisations, for instance, parties. In-group and out-group
       distinctions are certainly intrinsic properties of mass party organisation, but they do
       not necessarily imply hate or aggression; they may rather lead to the healthy and nec-
       essary identification of those privileged groups extracting value and resources from
       the many at the bottom.                               
         What should be at the core of our reflections on the main challenges of democracy
       and polarisation is not the need to individualise and undermine collective identities,
       but the urgency to rethink democratic mass political organisations. Among the main

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 17 of 21 5
                                                             
       obstacles in this endeavour are not in-group identities or feelings of belonging, but
       undemocratic and rigidly hierarchical political organisations and politics. Certainly,
       political struggle through ideological and affective polarisation is not without prob-
       lems and potential dangers. Bonapartism and hierarchical organisational structures
       can deviate, also on the left, towards unfruitful affective polarisation, propagating
       hate based on identity, while ignoring the need for class-based, intersectional politi-
       cal alliances and the structural underpinnings of political conflict. In fact, the basic
       developments of capitalist societies in the last decades (marketisation, individual-
       ism, rise of inequality) have paved the way for the superficial and undemocratic use
       of politics. As a consequence, the personalisation and elitism of parties can lead to
       the rise of harmful and unfruitful polarisation. In a similar vein, our participation
       in the public sphere and social media is mediated by crucial structural transforma-
       tions that we have described above. To face polarisation in the public sphere and its
       impact on democracy, we argue that the first step must be to problematise property
       relations and value extraction in the platform economy (Mau, 2019; Cini, 2023). It
       is urgent to mobilise a deep reflection on ownership concentration and conditions for
       the infrastructure of digital communication, as the main driver organising the pub-
       lic sphere nowadays. Subsequently, we must address the various groups confronting
       in the public sphere and distinguish between the powerful actors and those histori-
       cally excluded from the public view in capitalist societies. These two elements must
       precede further reflections on the ways to minimise aggressive contention, anger,
       and distrust that permeate social media and, more generally, the public sphere. If
       our main goal is to revitalise democratic mobilisation, we cannot lose sight of the
       structural dynamics historically serving to extract value from the many and establish-
       ing the infrastructural conditions for the production and reproduction of media. To
       put it bluntly, regarding mass organisation and the digital public sphere, we contend
       that political polarisation can be positive when embedded in a large-scale process
       of democratic expansion. Accordingly, the mainstream polarisation narrative in the
       terms in which it has been presented here functions rather as an ideological disposi-
       tive to prevent such democratic expansion by disarming the people from the tools for
       their self-emancipation: a structural and deep critique of social relations and large
       platforms for self-expression and political organisation.
       Author contributions J.R. developed the main idea and structure of the article as well as revised its overall
       coherence. J.R. contributed to write the text, together with the other two authors, within the sections of the
       article.D.B. contributed to write the text within the sections of the article. He also read the whole manu-
       script and critically commented on it.A.M. contributed to write the text within the sections of the article.
       He also read the whole manuscript and critically commented on it.
       Funding The second author, Daniel Balinhas, was supported by the Irish Research Council (now Taighde
       Éireann – Research Ireland) under grant number CHISTERA-CW68565 (CON-NET).
       Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
       Declarations                                          
       Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 18 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
       Disclosure statement No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
       is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n
       s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / .                               
       References                                            
       Al Atiqi, M. (2023). Echo Chamber and Polarization in Social Media. An Agent-Based Modeling
         Approach. Springer.                                 
       Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Doubleday.
       Almond, G., & Verba, S. (1963). The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations.
         Princeton University Press.                         
       Arbatli, E., & Rosenberg, D. (2021). United we stand, divided we rule: How political polarization erodes
         democracy. Democratization, 28(2), 285–307. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 3 5 1 0 3 4 7 . 2 0 2 0 . 1 8 1 8 0 6 8
       Bagdikian, C. H. (2004). The New Media Monopoly. Beacon Press.
       Balinhas, D. (2023). Bringing critical social psychology to the study of political polarization. Social and
         Personality Psychology Compass, 17(1), e12721. https://doi.org/10.1111/spc3.12721
       Balinhas, D., & Tileaga, C. (2025). Divided opinion: The interactional accomplishment of ideological
         antagonism. Journal of Social and Political Psychology, 13(1), 132–154. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 5 9 6 4 / j
         s p p . 1 3 8 7 1                                   
       Bennett, W. L., & Kneuer, M. (2024). Communication and democratic erosion: The rise of illiberal public
         spheres. European Journal of Communication, 39(2), 177–196.
       Bettarelli, L., Close, C., & Van Haute, E. (2022). Is protest only negative? Examining the effect of emo-
         tions and affective polarization on protest behaviour. Politics and Governance, 10(4), 311–324.
         https://doi.org/10.17645/pag.v10i4.5665             
       Broockman, D. E., Kalla, J. L., & Westwood, S. J. (2023). Does affective polarization undermine demo-
         cratic norms or accountability? Maybe not. American Journal of Political Science, 67(3), 808-828.
         https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12719                  
       Brown, K. (2024). Perceptions of the ‘mainstream’ and the mainstreaming of the far right: from Ed
         Sheeran to Keir Starmer. Journal of Political Ideologies, 1–22. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 3 5 6 9 3 1 7 .
         2 0 2 4 . 2 4 0 8 2 4 1                             
       Brown, K., & Mondon, A. (2020). Populism, the media and the mainstreaming of the far right: The guard-
         ian’s coverage of populism as a case study. Politics, 41(3), 279–295.
       Brown, K., & Newth, G. (2024). ‘Post-fascism’, or how the far right talks about itself: The 2022 Italian
         election campaign as a case study. Critical Discourse Studies. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 7 4 0 5 9 0 4 . 2 0
         2 4 . 2 3 3 9 8 5 8                                 
       Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter. Routledge.     
       Casal Bértoa, F., & Rama, J. (2021). Polarization: What do we know and what can we do about it? Fron-
         tiers in Political Science, 3, 687695.              
       Cini, L. (2023). How algorithms are reshaping the exploitation of labour-power: Insights into the process
         of labour invisibilization in the platform economy. Theory and Society, 52, 885–911. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g
         / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / s 1 1 1 8 6 - 0 2 3 - 0 9 5 2 0 - 9
       Cioffi, J. W., Kenney, M. F., & Zysman, J. (2022). Platform power and regulatory politics: Polanyi for the
         twenty-first century. New Political Economy, 27(5), 820–836.
       Comellas, J. M., & Torcal , M. (2025). A longitudinal study on the dynamic relationship between affec-
         tive polarization and radical right’s emergence: The case of VOX in Spain. Political Studies,
         00323217251340890. https://doi.org/10.1177/00323217251340890

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 19 of 21 5
       Di Masso, A. (2012). Grounding citizenship: Toward a political psychology of public space. Political
         Psychology, 33(1), 123–143.                         
       Druckman, J. N., Klar, S., Krupnikov, Y., Levendusky, M., & Ryan, J. B. (2022). (Mis)estimating affective
         polarization. The Journal of Politics, 2022 84(2), 1106–1117.
       Finlayson, L. (2012). The political is political. University of Cambridge.
       Fraser, N. (1990). Rethinking the public sphere: A contribution to the critique of actually existing democ-
         racy. Social Text No, 25/26, 56–80.                 
       Glynos, J., & Mondon, A. (2019). The political logic of populist hype: The case of right-wing populism’s
         ‘meteoric rise’ and its relation to the status quo. In P. CossariniF Vallespín (Ed.), Populism and
         passions: Democratic legitimacy after austerity (pp. 82-101). Routledge Advances in Democratic
         Theory, Routledge.                                  
       Goyvaerts, J., Brown, K., Mondon, A., De Cleen, B., & Glynos, J. (2024). On the politics of ‘Populism’:
         The case of populist hype. In G. Katsambekis, & Y. Stavrakakis (Eds.), Elgar research handbook
         on populism (pp.527-539). Edward Elgar Publishing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781800379695.00059
       Habermas, J. (1984). The Theory of Communicative Action: Reason and the rationalization of society.
         Beacon Press.                                       
       Habermas, J. (1993). The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. An Inquiry into a Category of
         Bourgeois Society. The MIT Press.                   
       Hartman, R., Blakey, W., Womick, J., Bail, C., Finkel, E. J., Han, H., Sarrouf, J., Schroeder, J., Sheeran,
         P., Van Bavel, J. J., Willer, R., & Gray, K. (2022). Interventions to reduce partisan animosity. Nature
         Human Behaviour, 6(9), Article 9.                   
       Harvey, D. (2005). A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford University Press.
       Harvey, D. (2008). The right to the city. New Left Review, 53, 23–40.
       Hernández, E., Anduiza, E., & Rico, G. (2021). Affective polarization and the salience of elections. Elec-
         toral Studies, 69, 102203. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . e l e c t s t u d . 2 0 2 0 . 1 0 2 2 0 3
       Hübscher, E., Sattler, T., & Wagner, M. (2023). Does austerity cause polarization? British Journal of
         Political Science, 53(4), 1170–1188. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123422000734
       Huddy, L., Mason, L., & Aarøe, L. (2015). Expressive partisanship: Campaign involvement, political emo-
         tion, and partisan identity. American Political Science Review, 109(1), 1–17.
       Hunger, S., & Paxton, F. (2021). What’s in a buzzword? A systematic review of the state of populism
         research in political science. Political Science Research and Methods, online first.
       Iyengar, S., & Westwood, S. J. (2015). Fear and loathing across party lines: New evidence on group polar-
         ization. American Journal of Political Science, 59(3), 690–707.
       Iyengar, S., Sood, G., & Lelkes, Y. (2012). Affect, not ideology: A social identity perspective on polariza-
         tion. Public Opinion Quarterly, 76(3), 405–431.     
       Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N., & Westwood, S. J. (2019). The origins and con-
         sequences of affective polarization in the united States. Annual Review of Political Science, 22,
         129–146.                                            
       Katz, R. S., & Mair, P. (2014). [1995]) Changing models of Party Organization and Party Democracy: The
         Emergence of the Cartel Party, in On parties, party systems and democracy: selected writings of Peter
         Mair, edited by Ingrid van Biezen, pp.: 393–414, ECPR Press, Essex.
       Kitschelt, H. (2004). Diversification and reconfiguration of party systems in postindustrial democracies.
         Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.                           
       Klein, E. (2020). Why We’re Polarized. Avid Reader.   
       Kleinfeld, R. (2023). The literature on polarization (pp. 14–40). In Polarization, democracy, and political
         violence in the United States: What the rese arch says. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
         http://www.jstor.org/stable/resrep53058.6           
       Laclau, E., & Mouffe, C. (1985). Hegemony and Socialist Strategy. Towards a Radical Democratic Poli-
         tics. Verso.                                        
       Le Bon, G. (1963). Psychologie des foules. Les Presses universitaires de. France.
       Lefebvre, H. (1968). Le droit à La Ville. Anthropos.  
       Lipset, S. M., & Rokkan, S. (1990). Cleavage Structures, Party Systems, and Voter Alignments, in Peter
         Mair (Ed.) The West European Party System (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 91–111.
       Mair, P. (2006). Ruling the Void. New Left Review, 42, Nov/Dec.
       Manin, B. (1997). The Principles of Representative Government. Cambridge University Press.
       Mau, S. (2019). The Metric Society. On the quantification of the social. Polity Press.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        5  Page 20 of 21                        J. Roch et al.
       Miller, L. (2020). Polarización en España: más divididos por ideología e identidad que por políticas
         públicas (EsadeEcPol Insight No. 18, pp. 1–14). EsadeEcPol. h t t p s : / / d o b e t t e r . e s a d e . e d u / e s / p o l a r i z
         ac i o n - e s p a n a                              
       Miller, L. (2023). Polarizados. La política que nos divide. Deusto.
       Mondon, A. (2024). ‘Really existing liberalism, the bulwark fantasy, and the enabling of reactionary, far
         right politics’, Constellations, online first.      
       Moore-Berg, S. L., Hameiri, B., & Bruneau, E. (2020). The prime psychological suspects of toxic political
         polarization. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 34, 199-204. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . c o b e h
         a. 2 0 2 0 . 0 5 . 0 0 1                            
       Moulaert, F., Swyngedouw, E., & Rodríguez, A. (2001). Social polarization in metropolitan areas: The role
         of new urban policy. European Urban and Regional Studies, 8(2), 99–102.
       Müller, J. W. (2016). What is Populism? University of Pennsylvania Press.
       Negt, O., & Kluge, A. (1993). Public Sphere and Experience Toward an Analysis of the Bourgeois and
         Proletarian Public Sphere. University of Minnesota Press.
       O’Brian, Neil A.. (2024). The Roots of Polarization. From the Racial Realignment to the Culture Wars.
         The University of Chicago Press.                    
       Newth, G. H., Brown, K., & Mondon, A. (2025). Researching and Understanding Far-Right Politics in
         Times of Mainstreaming. The Journal of Race, Ethnicity, and Politics. Online first.
       Orr, L. V., Fowler, A., & Huber, G. A. (2023). Is affective polarization driven by Identity, Loyalty, or sub-
         stance? American Journal of Political Science, 67(4), 948–962.
       Orriols, L. (2023). Democracia de trincheras. Por qué Votamos a Quienes Votamos. Ediciones Península.
       Ostrogorsky, M. (1902). Democracy and the Organization of Political Parties. Macmillan Co.
       Piazza, J. A. (2023). Political polarization and political violence. Security Studies, 32(3), 476–504. h t t p s : /
         / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 0 9 6 3 6 4 1 2 . 2 0 2 3 . 2 2 2 5 7 8 0
       Porto Requejo, M., & Dolores (2023). Polarización En periódicos españoles: Significado y contextos de
         Uso. Cultura Lenguaje Y Representación, XXX, 223–242.
       Quayle, M. (2025). Social identity networks: People holding attitudes are a collective social identity infor-
         mation system and bipartite networks are a useful way to represent them. European Review of Social
         Psychology, 1–66. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 / 1 0 4 6 3 2 8 3 . 2 0 2 5 . 2 5 1 4 4 3 3
       Rancière, J. (1996). Dis-agreement: Politics and Philosophy. University of Minnesota.
       Rancière J. (2007) Hatred of Democracy. London: Verso.
       Crouch C. (2004). Post-democracy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
       Reicher, S. (2012). From perception to mobilization: The shifting paradigm of prejudice. In J. Dixon & M.
         Levine (Eds.), Beyond prejudice: Extending the social psychology of conflict, inequality and social
         change (pp. 27–47). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139022736.003
       Risse, T. (2000). Let’s Argue! Communicative action in world politics. International Organization, 54(1),
         1–39. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2601316           
       Roch, J. (2024). The Populism-Euroscepticism nexus. A Discursive Comparative Analysis of Germany and
         Spain. Routledge.                                   
       Roch, J. (2025). ¿Polarizados o paralizados? Surgimiento y transformaciones Del movimiento
         democrático. Tecnos.                                
       Röllicke, L. (2023). Polarisation, identity and affect—Conceptualising affective polarisation in multi-party
         systems. Electoral Studies, 85, 102655. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . e l e c t s t u d . 2 0 2 3 . 1 0 2 6 5 5
       Rothers, A. (2025). The Poles in polarization: Social categorization and affective polarization in multiparty
         systems. Electoral Studies, 95, 102908. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . e l e c t s t u d . 2 0 2 5 . 1 0 2 9 0 8
       Rudolph, T. J., & Hetherington, M. J. (2021). Affective polarization in political and nonpolitical settings.
         International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 33(3), 591–606.
       Serrano Zamora. (2022). Is populism a social pathology? The myth of immediacy and its effects. European
         Journal of Social Theory, 25(4), 578–595.           
       Simon, B. (2020). A new perspective on intergroup conflict: The social psychology of politicized struggles
         for recognition. Theory & Psychology, 30(2), 147–163.
       Simon, B., Reininger, K. M., Schaefer, C. D., Zitzmann, S., & Krys, S. (2019). Politicization as an anteced-
         ent of polarization: Evidence from two different political and National contexts. British Journal of
         Social Psychology, 58(4), 769–785. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjso.12307
       Smith, L. G., Thomas, E. F., Bliuc, A. M., & McGarty, C. (2024). Polarization is the psychological founda-
         tion of collective engagement. Communications Psychology, 2(1), Article 41. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 3
         8 / s 4 4 2 7 1 - 0 2 4 - 0 0 0 8 9 - 2             

[PAGE 21]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       A critique of the polarisation narrative: expanding the limits of… Page 21 of 21 5
       Spivak, G. C. (1988). Can the subaltern speak? In P. Williams, & L. Chrisman (Eds.), Colonial discourse
         and postcolonial theory (pp. 66–111). Harvester Wheatsheaf.
       Stavrakakis, Y. (2018). Paradoxes of polarization: Democracy’s inherent division and the (anti-) populist
         challenge. American Behavioral Scientist, 62(1), 43–58.
       Svolik, M. W. (2019). Polarization versus democracy. Journal of Democracy, 30(3), 20–32.
       Taggart, P. (2004). Populism and representative politics in contemporary Europe. Journal of Political
         Ideologies, 9(3), 269–288.                          
       Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G. Austin, & S.
         Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33–47). Brooks/Cole.
       Thompson, E. P. (1966). The Making of the English Working Class. Vintage Books.
       Thompson, J. B. (1998). Los media y La Modernidad. Una Teoría de Los medios de Comunicación. Paidós.
       Tileaga (2014). Prejudice as Collective Definition: Ideology, Discourse and Moral Exclusion. In: Antaki,
         C. and Condor, S. (eds.) Rhetoric, ideology and social psychology: Essays in honour of Michael Bil-
         lig (pp. 71-82). Routledge.                         
       Torcal, M. (2023). De votantes a hooligans. La polarización política en España. Catarata.
       Vallespín, F. (2021). La sociedad de La intolerancia. Galaxia Gutenberg.
       Van Zomeren, M., Postmes, T., & Spears, R. (2008). Toward an integrative social identity model of collec-
         tive action: A quantitative research synthesis of three socio-psychological perspectives. Psychologi-
         cal Bulletin, 134(4), 504.                          
       Voelkel, J. G., Chu, J., Stagnaro, M. N., Mernyk, J. S., Redekopp, C., Pink, S. L., ... & Willer, R. (2023).
         Interventions reducing affective polarization do not necessarily improve anti-democratic attitudes.
         Nature human behaviour, 7(1), 55-64. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01466-9
       Von Beyme, K. (1985). Political Parties in Western Democracies. Palgrave Macmillan.
       Williams, R. (2005). Culture and materialism. Verso. (Original work published 1980)
       Wood, E. M. (2012). Liberty and Property: A Social History of Western Political Thought from the Renais-
         sance to Enlightenment. Verso Books.                
       Wood, E. M. (2016). Democracy Against Capitalism: Renewing Historical Materialism. Verso Books.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Juan Roch is assistant professor of political science at National University of Distance Education (UNED,
       Madrid). His research interests focus on populist and nationalist discourses, the crises of the European
       Union, and the study of legitimacy in contemporary liberal democracies. He is author of the books. The
       Populism-Euroscepticism Nexus: A discursive comparative analysis of Germany and Spain (Routledge,
       2023) and ¿Polarizados o paralizados? Surgimiento y transformaciones del movimiento democrático
       (Tecnos, 2025).                                       
       Daniel Balinhas is postdoctoral researcher in social psychology at Limerick University. His work focuses
       on intergroup processes and conflict, political polarization, and the study of social forces that produce,
       develop, and sustain group-based inequalities.        
       Aurelien Mondon is a Professor of Politics at the University of Bath and co-convenor of the Reaction-
       ary Politics Research Network. His research focuses predominantly on the mainstreaming of reactionary
       politics through elite discourse. He is the author of The Mainstreaming of the Extreme Right in France
       and Australia: A Populist Hegemony? (2013) and co-author of Reactionary democracy: How racism and
       the populist far right became mainstream (2020) with Aaron Winter. He is the co-editor of After Charlie
       Hebdo: Terror, racism and free speech (2017) and The Ethics of Researching the Far Right (2024).
                                                             
                                                             