[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:893–896       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00762-z            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Civic education in polarized times                    
                                                             
       Elizabeth Beaumont and Eric Beerbohm (eds) New York, New York
       University Press, 2024, 264 pp., ISBN: 9781479829064  
                                                             
       Sarah Stitzlein1                                      
                                                             
       Published online: 12 May 2025                         
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       This edited collection takes up the pressing problem of polarization. It reveals
       the increasing importance of quality civic education for intervening into this
       complicated matter, while also highlighting how aspects of polarization make
       teaching civic education more challenging. It considers both teaching in a polarized
       context and for a polarized era. The chapters draw from participants at a conference
       for the American Society for Political and Legal Philosophy.
         The structure of the book likely reflects its conference origins, where ideas are
       often proposed and then critiqued. It entails three lead articles (authored by Seana
       Shiffrin, Justin Driver, and Ilana Paul-Binyamin, Wurud Jayusi and Yael Tamir),
       with each offering a different take on how to improve civic education. They are
       then followed by discussants who extend and challenge the initial proposals offered.
       Finally, the last chapter contains the keynote presentation by Sigal Ben-Porath, Amy
       Gutmann, and Dennis Thompson, though it lacks respondents.
         Of the three feature chapters and responses, I found the section based on Driver’s
       proposals to be the most interesting. Driver makes the case for a ‘student-centered’
       civic education that emphasizes key court decisions related to students and their
       education, thereby ‘centering the historic struggles for students’ constitutional rights
       as the very touchstone of civic education’ (p. 101). Such an approach would not
       only entail learning important historical information about the United States and
       legal debates within it, but also would highlight the role of students in shaping the
       constitutional order, while additionally bringing that history into the present day as
       students debate unresolved issues of democratic life. 
         Jennifer Morton is Driver’s most astute respondent. She raises both practical
       concerns about how Driver’s approach may fail to head off partisan divides, as
       well as bigger picture concerns about how grounding civic education in law cases
       overly emphasizes current legal findings to the detriment of equipping students to
       imaginatively reconsider how democracy might be different and improved (p. 135).
       *                                                     
         Sarah Stitzlein                                     
         sarah.stitzlein@uc.edu                              
       1 University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA 
                                             Vol.:(0123456789)

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       894                                       S. Stitzlein
                                                             
       Her call reveals an alternative underlying philosophy of education, where civic
       education should be aimed at developing skills of critique and active transformation,
       rather than mere reproduction of democracy through knowledge of its laws and
       institutions. Similarly, Lisa Garcia Bedolla points out that more than just civic
       knowledge is needed for students to lead active and engaged lives (p. 144).
         Another chapter that I found particularly interesting was that of Christine
       Bowman. Responding to the featured chapter by Ilana Paul-Binyamin, Wurud
       Jayusi and Yael Tamir, Bowman points out how the typical way of understanding
       and defending free speech on college campuses, largely as a matter of a marketplace
       ideas enabled by a negative right to speak, does not help us battle polarization.
       Instead, she endorses the ‘new democratic model’, which embraces the need to
       ensure inclusive spaces of creating and sharing knowledge on campuses that take
       into account the impact of harmful speech on some community members and may
       entail redistributing resources and education to attend to such harms (p. 195). The
       new democratic model seems better poised to foster empathy to push back against
       some aspects of polarization, though it may face criticisms from more recent
       demands from President Trump and some state legislators that universities be
       neutral facilitators of diverse viewpoints.           
         The keynote chapter completes the collection on a high note. The authors reveal
       how differing philosophies of civic education lead to two distinct aims: one of
       cooperation (where citizens learn to work together) and one of competition (where
       students learn to advocate a particular view or be an advocate for a political group).
       Intriguingly, they suggest that students need the knowledge, skills, and attitudes
       necessary for both in order to navigate today’s polarized settings and to work across
       divides within them. This suggestion then returns to the framing discussion for the
       collection of civic education both in and for polarization. I worry slightly that they
       might be too optimistic in their account of a competition pedagogy, which could
       slide into antagonism, a possibility they might attend to by more closely considering
       the arguments of their agonist counterparts, such as Chantal Mouffe (2000, 2005).
       Additionally, their notion of cooperation might also benefit from further discussion
       of Danielle Allen’s account of civic friendship (Allen, 2004). They close with
       concrete suggestions, highlighting civic education programs and approaches already
       up and running that might be tailored to their proposal. Notably, though, one
       of those approaches, action civics, has faced bans in some states in recent years,
       suggesting it has only limited viability. These, however, are merely minor concerns
       about an otherwise excellent chapter.                 
         Lisa Garcia Bedolla points out what is really a missed opportunity in the volume
       as a whole when she notes that the proposals of the legal scholars and political
       philosophers offered would be better if ‘rooted in the robust literature on teaching,
       learning, and civic education that currently exists’ (p. 146). Indeed, the participants
       seemed to omit current research and critiques of civic curriculum and pedagogy.
       Beyond references to Diana Hess and Paula McAvoy’s important collaborations and
       the philosophy of education of Meira Levinson, leading voices in the field of civic
       education are rarely cited. This oversight risks contributors reinventing the wheel.
         Given its central role in the text, polarization is problematically not well defined
       at the outset of the collection, nor are consistent definitions upheld through the book.

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Civic education in polarized times           895      
                                                             
       The introduction primarily focuses on ‘severe, toxic, or hyperpolarization’, but these
       terms are more descriptive of the degree, rather than the type, of polarization (p.
       5). Most broadly, the authors seem to be referring to affective polarization, where
       citizens hold negative views of those inhabiting competing political perspectives
       or groups. This differs considerably from other forms of ideological polarization,
       including partisan or belief polarization, where the views of individuals in a political
       group become more extreme and more uniform, and platform polarization, where
       the distance between the views of competing political parties expands and moves
       away from the center. Detecting this shortcoming, Brandon Terry rightly asserts,
       ‘Understanding the stakes of our inquiry requires adjudicating between different
       kinds of polarization, identifying their central patterns, animating forces, and moral-
       political quandaries’ (p. 63).                        
         Failure to sufficiently define polarization leads to inconsistent claims about it as
       well as a few problematic implications of the authors’ recommendations. To provide
       one example that demonstrates both shortcomings of leaving out civic education
       research and clear definitions of polarization, the keynote authors recommend
       a debate pedagogy, yet research in the field has shown that debates may lead to
       increased belief polarization (McAvoy & McAvoy, 2021; Schkade et al., 2010). This
       part of their otherwise admirable proposal for handling other aspects of polarization
       may end up exacerbating the situation it is intended to ameliorate. Inviting more
       social studies teachers and teacher-educators into the conversation could have helped
       to head this off this problem.                        
         Setting aside those concerns, there is much to celebrate in this book. Perhaps
       owing to their conference hosts, Harvard’s Edmond and Lily Safra Ethics
       Center, I was pleased to see the editors reveal how polarization also impacts the
       ethical relationships between citizens as well as between citizens and democratic
       institutions. This helps to uncover how polarization alarmingly reshapes how we
       enact democracy in our everyday lives. Additionally, I was pleased to see the book
       connect matters of polarization to battles over truth (Stitzlein, 2024).
         To close, let me highlight recent developments in U.S. democracy that both
       simultaneously challenge some of the suggestions made in this collection, while
       also highlighting the pressing need to take up the ideas these authors raise. In the
       time since initially sharing their ideas, presidential leadership has changed, with
       President Trump banning DEI efforts on many fronts. Yet some of the proposals
       offered by the contributors are aligned with DEI initiatives in ways that might make
       them challenging, if not infeasible, to implement today. Additionally, some state
       legislatures have proposed or enacted new legislation regulating civic education
       and ‘divisive concepts’ that extends beyond the earliest examples noted in the
       introduction. One might wonder whether some recommendations, such as Driver’s
       call for a Presidential Commission on civic education, would still stand in light of
       these changes (Driver, 2024, p. 114). Or, perhaps some contributors might double-
       down on their proposals, noting that they may be needed more than ever in light of
       the increasing affective, belief, and platform polarizations we are witnessing now.
       All of that is to say that this book takes up a dynamic and important topic with an
       eye toward a future of improved civic education, a future to which we should all be
       deeply concerned.                                     

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       896                                       S. Stitzlein
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Allen, D. (2004) Talking to strangers: Anxieties of citizenship since Brown v. Board of education. Univer-
         sity of Chicago Press.                              
       Driver, J. (2024) ‘Civic Education, Students’ Rights, and the Supreme Court’, in Civic Education in
         Polarized Times.New York University Press, pp. 97–134.
       McAvoy, P. and McAvoy, G.E. (2021) Can debate and deliberation reduce partisan divisions? Evidence
         from a study of high school students. Peabody Journal of Education 96(3): 275–284.
       Mouffe, C. (2000) The democratic paradox. Verso.      
       Mouffe, C. (2005) On the political. Routledge.        
       Schkade, D., Sunstein, C.R. and Hastie, R. (2010) When deliberation produces extremism. Critical
         Review 22(2–3): 227–252.                            
       Stitzlein, S.M. (2024) Teaching honesty in a populist era: Emphasizing truth in the education of citizens.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             