[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:766–784       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00768-7            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,
       and finitude                                          
                                                             
                                                             
       Stephen K. White1                                     
                                                             
       Accepted: 19 April 2025 / Published online: 26 June 2025
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Recent appeals to the aesthetic-affective realm, specifically to sublimity, tend to con-
       centrate on how it can work to disrupt political power. But another, older, tradition
       of interpretation looks to sublimity not as a generator of dissensus, but rather as
       a feeling that can bind people together to enact democratic power. Its roots are in
       eighteenth-century figures as diverse as Kant, Robespierre, and John Adams. But
       there is a perennial problem with this tradition: The enthusiastic exaltation associ-
       ated with being motivated by the sublimity of popular democratic movements is dif-
       ficult to differentiate from a similar motivation evident in fascist ones. I engage this
       difficulty in two ways. First, I trace how it troubles William E. Connolly’s attempt
       to link the aesthetic-affective dimension in politics with the myth of a general strike
       as a way of motivating future collective democratic action. But my engagement with
       Connolly is not just critical. It also, secondly, draws positive value from his thinking
       about how mortality needs to be folded into our political sensorium. That insight
       is crucial if we are to conceive and cultivate a sense of sublimity that is associated
       not just with enthusiasm, but also with a certain kind of sobriety about our fini-
       tude, our human limits. The embrace of a two-fold sense of sublimity, encompassing
       both “enthusing” as well as “sobering” dimensions, can help constitute a democratic
       sensibility that deflates proto fascistic tendencies to see ourselves as embodying an
       unlimited will to power when we participate in collective insurgency.
       Keywords Myth · Democracy · Insurgency · Sublimity · Finitude · William E.
       Connolly                                              
                                                             
       The association of sublimity with politics is a venerable one. In recent years, many
       scholars have envisioned the feeling of sublimity primarily as a source of dissensus
       and disruption that can loosen the hold of frames of power. The connection of that
       feeling with the unsettling of normalized expectations allows it to play this role in
                                                             
       *                                                     
         Stephen K. White                                    
         skw2n@virginia.edu                                  
       1 University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904, USA
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 767
                                                             
       relation to persistent injustice. We might think of this effect as a “centrifugal” force
       on political power, disrupting its grip on the consciousness of individuals.1 But there
       is another tradition of interpretation, an older one, that looks to ways in which our
       aesthetic-affective reactions can enhance, as opposed to disrupt, the concentration
       of power—more particularly for present purposes, the democratic concentration of
       power. In the eighteenth century, attention began to focus on the phenomenon of
       popular insurgency. This tradition attends to the motivating power of the sublimity
       of shared, democratic enthusiasm and awe to bind together those struggling against
       authoritarian orders. We can envision this way of understanding the influence of
       feelings of sublimity as involving a binding, “centripetal” force on the generation of
       power in collective action.                           
         Neither of these approaches to sublimity can claim to be categorically preferable.
       The centripetal and the centrifugal perspectives each brings a valuable, but contest-
       able, angle of insight into politics. And each is also entangled with a distinctive
       problem. For the centrifugal, a persisting question is whether it ends up authorizing
       only a negative attitude toward any coherent formation of political power, authori-
       tarian or democratic, even though it imagines its role to be one of opening space
       for democracy. In short, power is engaged only for the purpose of disruption; it is
       not explicitly affirmed as something to be shared and enhanced. For the centripetal,
       the critical doubt is whether its solidifying affirmation of popular manifestations of
       power can also sufficiently differentiate between types of insurgencies. In short, it
       is not immediately clear how one can distinguish between enthusiasm for popular
       democratic phenomena of power and enthusiasm for fascist ones.
         In what follows, I want to critically rethink the centripetal conception with the
       intention of mitigating the fascism problem. In today’s climate of emerging proto
       fascism in a variety of countries around the world, this sort of endeavor will hope-
       fully be seen as having potential real-world implications, a characterization some-
       times denied to explorations of topics associated with aesthetics.2 To give my dis-
       cussion a specific referent for engaging this nexus of questions, I turn to the work
       of William E. Connolly. He has made important contributions to understanding how
       our aesthetic-affective sensibility relates to politics, as well as to how we should fold
       those insights together with democratic insurgency. Connolly has argued that effec-
       tive resistance to the cascading problems of climate destruction, racism, extractive
       capitalism, inequality, and right-wing populism requires us to consider novel ways
       of motivating democratic action; in short, generating centripetal force. More par-
       ticularly, he has promoted the value of a “turn to myth” for the political left, more
       1 Perhaps the best representative of this dominant contemporary way of conceiving the political sublime
       is Shapiro, 2018, pp. 2–4, 39, 172. Jacques Rancière characterizes this general approach as aiming “to
       think politics and aesthetics under the concept of dissensus” (2011, p. 1).
       2 When I refer to the fascism problem today in the U.S. and elsewhere, I am speaking of the congealing
       of several characteristics apparent on the right that constitute an emerging threat: Continual intensifica-
       tion of a sense of “us” vs. “them,” with the latter defined especially in racial and ethnic terms; a growing
       enthusiasm for violence directed at “them” that is encouraged by leaders; and all this is bathed in the
       imaginary of a “mythic past,” whose greatness we are promised can be regained. See Stanley (2020, pp.
       xiii, xxviii-xxxii, 5, 58, 183, 187).                 

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       768                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
       particularly, the myth of “the general strike,” as crucial to an effective appeal to take
       up collective action. Although he does not explicitly use a concept of sublimity in
       this context, I will argue that he in fact operates with one, more particularly one
       that is centripetal.3 The problem with this implicit deployment is that it allows the
       fascism problem to persist, even though this is manifestly not Connolly’s intention
       (2017a, pp. 1, 121–149; 2022, pp. 140–141).\ My point is not to claim that Connolly
       ends up supporting fascism, but rather that he configures a sensibility supporting
       violence on the left that is difficult to clearly distinguish from that of fascism, with
       its appeals to myth and enthusiasm for vehement action. The goal of my analysis is
       simply to encourage those on the democratic left to think more carefully about how
       we should imagine a distinctly democratic approach to violence.
         This engagement with Connolly should not be seen as a simple, one-dimensional
       critique. Rather, my aim is to show that he could avoid the fascism difficulty if he
       were to explicitly embrace a certain understanding of the centripetal sublime that I
       will propose. Moreover, adopting that understanding also opens up an overlooked
       congruence between Connolly’s account of democratic insurgency, on the one hand,
       and the fundamental commitments of his own ontology of identity\difference, on the
       other—commitments that I share, and that are in fact crucial to the character of the
       centripetal conception of democratic sublimity that I propose. Thus, my strategy is
       one of constructive critique aimed at a mutually acceptable theoretical stance.
         Toward that goal, I pursue two lines of argument that provide grounds not for
       summarily rejecting his appeal to the myth of a general strike, but rather for recon-
       ceptualizing it in a more clearly democratic fashion. First, Connolly needs to rec-
       ognize that his account of that myth implicitly appeals to a conception of the cen-
       tripetal sublime. This emerges when he embraces the ideas of Georges Sorel who
       explicitly invokes the motivating power of sublimity, something that ended up
       making the latter’s ideas attractive to twentieth-century fascists. Thus, in turning
       to Sorel, Connolly unintentionally becomes entangled with this problem. Second,
       I argue that the way to address this difficulty is not by rejecting an embrace of the
       sublime altogether, but rather by adopting a modified conception of it. Taking this
       turn would also have an unexpected value for the coherence of Connolly’s work as a
       whole. This is because it helps better align his recent discussions of insurgency with
       his earlier reflections on identity\difference, especially in how the latter thematizes
       the role of human finitude or mortality.4 With my suggested reconfiguration, we
       achieve a perspective that highlights the admirable role a centripetal sublimity can
       play in sustaining specifically democratic upwellings of popular collective action.
         Centripetal conceptions of a political sublime have typically focused on the awe
       and elevating enthusiasm associated with motivating popular manifestations. In the
       3 My attention to the centripetal character of Connolly’s approach should not be taken as a claim that
       nothing he says is sympathetic to the centrifugal view. Clearly, he is interested in evoking dissensus in
       relation to existing political ideas and forms. My point is simply that what is most distinctive in his work
       is the way it engages the question of how to generate the positive, binding force of collective democratic
       commitment.                                           
       4 As Connolly says, he is presenting an interpretation of “life, identity, and death” (1991, p. 172). The
       role of finitude in Connolly is elaborated in White (2000, pp. 106–150).

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 769
                                                             
       eighteenth century, this association became common and was deployed by a remark-
       able variety of figures, including, notably, Kant (2011, pp. 22–25, 95; 2000, pp.
       153–154, 246–247; 1991, p. 182), Robespierre (Huet, 1994, p. 61), and John Adams
       (1773, 1964). But for Kant and Adams, this salutary elevation could become prob-
       lematic if it morphed into feelings of sheer enthusiasm for violence divorced from
       all sense of restraint. In what follows I want to pick up on this concern and address
       it by means of the articulation of a more capacious comprehension of the role sub-
       limity can play in political life, something that can help us see what is problem-
       atic about a reduction of sublimity into a feeling of unlimited enthusiasm. This will
       involve unpacking how our aesthetic-affective sensibility may be intertwined with a
       consciousness of human finitude. We might speak here of re-vivifying a “sobering”
       dimension of the sublime. A core contention of this article is that when we want to
       characterize the centripetal sublimity of democratic politics, this dimension must be
       brought more into the foreground, so that an experience of sublimity is imagined as
       encompassing both “enthusing” and “sobering” elements.5
         With the foregoing goals in mind, let me begin by recounting how Connolly
       theorizes democratic resistance. He has done a stellar job of analyzing the visceral,
       aesthetic-affective dimension of politics, focusing on how we might cultivate a self
       that is more aware and militant “as fascist movements proliferate and the Anthropo-
       cene gallops at an accelerating pace” (2023, p. 26). Although Connolly has provided
       perceptive elucidation of how we can work on ourselves and each other to make our
       sensorium more resistant to disturbing trends in the regnant political culture, for a
       long time he had relatively less to say about the visceral dimension of vehement,
       collective democratic insurgency itself. In the last decade, however, he has moved
       further in this direction with his bold appeal to the vivid idea of “cross-regional gen-
       eral strikes,” something he hopes will appear as the culmination of merging strands
       of political resistance (2017, p. 12).                
         But this appeal remains somewhat perplexing. He indicates that such a strike
       has the character of a “myth” (2017, pp. 12, 120, 146–147). My sense is that Con-
       nolly sees the need for democratic insurgency to appear as a looming, powerful ideal
       about which we should feel awe and enthusiasm, but he is not very clear about its
       form and the character of its attractiveness. The appeal to a general strike seems to
       function primarily as a symbolic driver of a hoped for, highly disruptive force of
       resistance against normalized politics. One of the main theorists of the idea of a gen-
       eral strike—and the one from whom Connolly draws his inspiration is the late nine-
       teenth and early twentieth-century French political thinker, Sorel (Connolly. 2017,
       pp. 129–131, 147). He believed that “terrifying” violent action, including bloodshed,
       was a crucial part of a general strike, something he hoped would “completely anni-
       hilate” the existing regime (Sorel, 1961, pp. 274–275). Without violence, he argued,
       revolutionary movements will fail to continually rejuvenate the awe and enthusiasm
       associated with a “sublime” (Sorel, 1961, pp. 139, 275), “epic state of mind” (Sorel,
       quoted in Jennings, 1985, p. 135).                    
       5 The character of such a bivalent conception of the sublime is explained at greater length in White
       (2025).                                               
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       770                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
         After his initial embrace of Sorel, however, Connolly struggles to create some
       distance from him regarding the violent characteristics of a general strike. But this
       secondary gesture generates some perplexity as to why he attaches his views to that
       thinker’s images in the first place. My key question for Connolly can now be stated
       this way: How might he clarify this striking appeal to a mythic of enthusiastic demo-
       cratic insurgency in a way that more persuasively coheres with both core democratic
       values and the deepest commitments of his work as a whole? In trying to answer
       these questions, I begin by considering in how the aesthetic-affective dimension of
       democratic insurgency has been taken up historically, especially how it has been
       associated with the topic of the sublime and entangled with the issue of political
       violence. This will help locate Connolly’s invocation of a general strike in a broader
       philosophical and historical context. In the next section, I explore how the issue of
       violence in democratic insurgency might be productively negotiated by means of
       a thematization of human finitude that is alien to fascism. My analysis starts in an
       unexpected place, namely, Edmund Burke’s reflections on how the feeling of sub-
       limity is entangled with our mortality. This path might seem to be a complete non-
       starter, given Burke’s fulsome rejection of any sort of vehement democratic mani-
       festation in Reflections on the Revolution in France (1987). But there may yet be
       something of value that can be redeemed in the way he associates finitude with the
       sublime. This unlikely interpretive path will hopefully be rendered less question-
       able when I suggest that a central theme in Connolly’s own thought runs parallel
       in its attention to finitude. Then in the subsequent section I try to flesh out how this
       way of thinking about the sublime encompasses a sensibility not only related to awe
       and enthusiasm, but also to a sobering sense of how our finitude should infuse our
       engagement with politics in general, but especially insurgent movements. In the final
       section, I show how my weaving together of these threads might help to provide a
       better context for Connolly’s appeal to the myth of a general strike as part of the
       motivational palate of democratic resistance. My specific claim here is intended to
       apply more generally to any attempt to bring the motivating force of sublimity into
       the imagination of emerging democratic power.         
       The aesthetic‑affective dimension of democratic insurgency
       I have suggested that there is a problem with how Connolly connects aesthetic-affec-
       tive sensibility in general with the motivation of democratic insurgency. At the heart
       of this deficiency is his neglect of what is, historically, the most salient orientation
       to conceptualizing the aesthetic-affective dimension of collective action. Here, I
       refer to the tradition of comprehending the visceral appeal of popular movements
       through the notion of sublimity. As noted above, the distinctively modern version
       of this was highlighted in the eighteenth century with the emergence of democratic
       revolutions. The first prominent philosophical characterizations of what we might
       call, following Jason Frank (2021), the “democratic sublime,” were either cautiously
       measured in their judgment (Kant, 1991, pp. 182–184) or downright hostile (Burke,
       1987, pp. 9–10, 15, 57, 134). Neither of these thinkers wanted to be seen as encour-
       aging what Robespierre lauded as the “sublime enthusiasm” of violent revolutionary
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 771
                                                             
       action—the ‘volcanic’ eruptions of democracy, as it were (quoted in Huet, 1994, p.
       61).                                                  
         The association of the sublime with natural phenomena like volcanos or vertigi-
       nous mountain peaks was a familiar one; but it must be remembered that the concept
       of the sublime in politics was always entangled with our moral character. In Burke, it
       is our character as mortal creatures of God who are embedded in social hierarchies;
       in Kant, it is our character as noumenal beings.6 Both believed that the significance
       of these moral frames can be heightened through cultivation. Of course, each of
       them thought that their way of perceiving these foundational values—noumenal in
       Kant and hierarchical, theistic in Burke—merely reflected something intrinsic to the
       metaphysical character of the world. Thus, each in his own way differentiated (even
       if not entirely explicitly) between something like a “real” or “authentic” (eigentlich)
       sublime and a “false” sublime, with only the former involving “true enthusiasm.”7
       The question of how exactly we should draw that distinction and cultivate it was
       approached differently by these two philosophers, as they witnessed the violence of
       the French Revolution.                                
         What I want to suggest is that Connolly needs to better engage the knot of ques-
       tions that is highlighted by those who have grappled with the entanglement of demo-
       cratic insurgency, foundational values, and the sublime. As I suggested above, this
       whole terrain of reflection becomes salient to Connolly when he appeals to the idea
       of a general strike as the culmination of the micro-politics of the self and the politics
       of “swarming” between diverse groups that he hopes will gather momentum toward
       a culminating volcanic eruption (2019, pp. 43; 2017, pp. 6, 123–129).
         The general strike is an image, not a blueprint for action. Like Sorel, Connolly
       promotes the idea of a general strike as a novel addition to our political mythic. In
       short, it needs to be part of the aesthetic-affective imaginary that generates enthusi-
       asm for vehement democratic movements. But Connolly, unlike Sorel, is quite clear
       that his idea of a general strike is to be one of restrained violence not involving sub-
       stantial “bloodshed.” This limitation is stated in relatively categorical terms. But the
       only reason Connolly gives for his position is that recourse to bloodshed on the left
       is strategically bad in the sense that it is likely to give those on the right the excuse
       to raise the level of their own violence (2017, pp. 131–132). This is no doubt a seri-
       ous consideration today; but I would question whether purely strategic reasoning
       here is adequate to comprehending the issue of bloodshed as it emerges at this point
       in the discussion of democratic insurgency.           
       6 Burke’s early treatment of the sublime tried to present itself as an empirical analysis of our “natu-
       ral” aesthetic-affective reactions. But this is not empiricism in our contemporary sense. It presumes the
       naturalness of the Great Chain of Being. The normative core of his analysis of our “natural” sensorium
       becomes increasingly evident in his later reactions to the French Revolution (White, 1994, pp. 4–5,
       25–27).                                               
       7 In a letter attributed to him, Burke explicitly refers to a “false sublime,” see Boulton, 1958, p. cxii.
       Even if it were to turn out that Burke did not explicitly use the term, it is clear that he continually
       employed the concept; see White, 1994, pp. 72–75. For Kant’s terminology, see 1991, pp. 182–183;
       Kant, 2000, pp. 129–30. This English edition translates das eigentliche Erhaben as the “properly sub-
       lime” (Kant, 1974, p. 166). I prefer rendering this as “real” or “authentic.” This accords more with the
       contrasting sense of a “false” sublime in Kant; see Clewis, 2009, pp. 180–181.

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       772                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
         One of my reasons for highlighting the importance of discussions of the sublime and
       politics becomes clearer in the light of this concern. That is because the issue of vio-
       lence, as I noted above, has always been at the center of discussions of modern demo-
       cratic insurgency. Concern about violence in the French Revolution led Kant to affirm
       the feeling of sublimity when experienced by one observing that novel emergence of
       popular politics, but he did not allow that to extend to any enthusiasm that might draw
       one toward participation in revolutionary violence. (Kant, 1991, pp. 182–184). Such cau-
       tion became vivid condemnation in Burke who believed that the French Revolution was
       awash in a “false” sublime: One powered by awe and enthusiasm in the face of scenes
       of human willfulness un-leashed from all the hierarchical social and political bonds of
       the ancien régime, as well as from the humility embodied in Christian values. Unlimited
       willfulness—human infinitude—was displacing a proper appreciation of our character
       as finite creations of an infinite deity atop the Great Chain of Being. This, to Burke, was
       at the core of the felonious assault on western civilization ushered into history by popu-
       lar insurgency; and when The Terror emerged, Burke could say he told us so.
         Generations of scholars of both liberal and conservative persuasions have at least
       tacitly followed Burke in his suspicions about the role of aesthetic-affective empower-
       ment of forceful democratic insurgency, even if they have not all wanted to endorse his
       nostalgia for a hierarchical world. Frank, in his The Democratic Sublime, has tried to
       show that this recurring suspicion amounts to a tendentious “democratic terror thesis”
       (Frank, 2021, pp. 68–69). As he argues, invocations of it simply tar every democratic
       manifestation in the streets with the brush of impending violence, terror, and authoritar-
       ianism. Although I agree with the bulk of Frank’s counterargument here, he neverthe-
       less clears the field of obstacles to his categorical affirmation of a democratic sublime
       a bit too quickly. By this I mean that he succeeds in showing that there is no necessary
       slide to terror and authoritarianism in vehement popular manifestations, but he has not
       refuted the argument that such manifestations may slide that way, if we simply bathe
       our action-oriented attitudes in the accelerant of a supportive aesthetic-affective sensi-
       bility. In short, popular insurgencies whose motivation is enhanced by such a sensibility
       may track in a democratic direction, but they may also track in populist authoritarian
       ones as well.                                         
         This is hardly a minor academic issue today, as many democratic polities confront
       right-wing populist movements. More events such as the insurgency in Washington,
       DC, on January 6, 2021, are not a remote possibility. Clearly, that event was an authen-
       tic, vehement popular manifestation, fired by collective enthusiasm; in short, entangled
       with an elevating sense of the sublime. Many of the participants felt they were acting
       together to “stop the steal” and save democracy. Is their feeling of being part of a sub-
       lime and estimable event defensible? Or is it a stunted, indefensible manifestation of a
       democratic ethos?                                     
       The sublime and finitude                              
       As noted earlier, Burke’s account of the sublime is deeply unfashionable today.
       But I want to suggest that there may yet be something partially valuable in his cri-
       tique of political insurrection, once we detach it from his affinity for hierarchy, both
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 773
                                                             
       theological and social-political. We might then begin to reconfigure his critique of
       modern, systemic political willfulness as calling valuable attention to a forgetting of
       our mortality, our finitude.8                         
         But how exactly might the cultivation of a sense of finitude infuse a feeling of the
       sublime, after one has given up the more familiar, apparently necessary, contrasting
       figure of divine infinitude? Burke was struck by the way in which some experiences
       of pain or the closeness of death can bring not just fear or terror, but also a curious
       sense of pleasurable elevation.9 Of course, if one is immediately threatened with
       death, there is nothing positive about it; it is merely terrifying. But if one is some-
       what removed from the danger, that space may allow for a subtle sense of elevation
       that, however, remains in tension with the “sobriety” evoked by the coerced viv-
       idness of our mortality experienced against the background of God’s immortality
       (Burke, 1990, p. 32). But if we relinquish that transcendental anchor, however, the
       compound sense of both pleasure and sobriety must be comprehended as emerging
       somewhat differently. It can arise, I would suggest, from experiencing our real but
       precarious, capacity to challenge and temporarily exceed limits in pursuing our ide-
       als, in this case the collective ideal of a sustainable democratic world. (This sort of
       experience would especially stand out if we were experiencing our finitude against
       the ontological background of an infinite becoming of the world around us, an idea
       at the core of Connolly’s own ontology, as I will show in a moment.)10
         The key issue here becomes how to conceptualize this in a way that does not
       inflate the exhilaration of challenging limits into a confidence in human limitless-
       ness. The feeling of sublimity needs to be better associated with the evocation
       of an experience of finitude joined with an uplifting, exhilarating sense of the
       human spirit engaging its limits in a world of becoming. This means embracing
       what I called above the “sobering” dimension of the sublime. It contrasts with,
       but also should accompany, the more familiar sense of an “enthusing” sublime
       that Frank so admirably illustrates. Democratic life must cultivate a sensibility
       characterized by a tensional congruence of the two, if it is to adequately distin-
       guish its own occasional resort to violence from that of fascism or of groups on
       the left for whom violence became simply an enthusiastically embraced strategy,
       like the Weather Underground or the Red Army Faction. 
         One might argue, however, that my suggestions about a distinctive democratic
       sensibility are not well grounded: Don’t all regimes, even fascist ones, attend in
       some way to our finitude? Those who die in the favored cause are exalted and
       8 As I suggested earlier (n. 6), various commentators, from Kant to the editor of a modern edition of A
       Philosophical Enquiry mistakenly see Burke as providing “a merely empirical exposition” of the sub-
       lime, thus missing entirely the philosophical centrality of finitude (Kant, 2000, p. 158; Burke, 1990, p.
       xi). Jean François Lyotard is one of the few contemporary philosophers who correctly comprehends this
       centrality (1989, pp. 204–206). A good treatment of how the normativity of Burke’s early work on aes-
       thetics is connected to his later political texts, is O’Neill (2012).
       9 For Burke, “death is the king of terrors” that can evoke the sublime; and pain is the “emissary” of
       death (1990, pp. 33–34, 36).                          
       10 A modified Nietzschean notion of being as becoming is crucial to Connolly’s underlying ontology.
       One must learn to “respect the diversity of life flowing over and through officially sanctioned identities…
       Life exceeds identity” (1991, p. 170).                

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       774                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
       remembered as martyrs. But here the enthusing valence of sublimity is consist-
       ently given effective priority; the other, sobering valence, plays a markedly sub-
       ordinate, even disappearing, role. The fascist does not allow deaths to resonate
       with any real depth, but rather categorically locks them into a script in which
       they serve a grief-transcending purpose without limits: the further “hardening
       [of] oneself like steel” against the enemy (Junger, 2008, pp. 16–17). We have
       seen a similar, if milder, version of this strategy pursued by the Trump move-
       ment. Leaders radically reinterpret moments that might otherwise be interpreted
       as evoking a sense of finitude and humility. For example, the enthusiasm of an
       election contest juxtaposed to the sobering moment of acknowledging that your
       party has lost is a crucial, if often overlooked, moment in the experience of dem-
       ocratic life. But Trump and his circle consistently urged supporters to literally
       deny these moments in relation to the 2020 election; thus, a loss was not really a
       loss, but only the occurrence of fraud and conspiracy by opponents. Supporters
       are accordingly encouraged to harden their hostility toward the enemy and enthu-
       siastically pursue their fight to retain power.       
         If one tries to think of a vivid example of how bivalent sensibility informs polit-
       ical protest in democratic polities, civil disobedience is likely to come quickly to
       mind given its notable highlighting of the sobering dimension. In his 1963, “Letter
       from a Birmingham Jail,” Martin Luther King, Jr., speaks of the “sublime courage”
       of the protestors as they faced the violence of police dogs and batons with a spirited
       sense of collective empowerment and sobriety (King 1963). Although this charac-
       terization of the protests is apt, it is nevertheless important not to misinterpret the
       exemplary character of what went on in places like Birmingham, Alabama in the
       1960s. These episodes quickly came to be distorted into narrowly restrictive mod-
       els of how oppositional protest should be conducted in liberal, constitutional orders.
       This sort of idealized interpretation allowed many white Americans to see any sort
       of more vehement, “uncivil” protests on the part of blacks in that era as patently ille-
       gitimate. The latter were seen as unacceptable in a “reasonably just” society, as John
       Rawls characterized the existing order. (Pineda, 2021, pp. 22–52). But for blacks in
       America at that time, the U.S. hardly fit that description. Thus, while instances like
       Birmingham should indeed be seen as embodying an admirable bivalent sensibility,
       that judgment should not be equated with the further claim that this status simulta-
       neously denies legitimacy to more uncivil modes of protest of the kind that tended
       to become prevalent in later years, both in the civil rights movement and in the anti-
       Vietnam war protests. The choice of a mode of protest always involves weighing the
       degree of injustice present in a regime against the degree of violence being enter-
       tained as appropriate by opposition actors. These are typically rough and fallible
       decisions in fraught contexts; and they may only find fuller justification after some
       passage of time (as I will explain further in a moment).
         It is thus crucial not to confuse my claims about the significance of a bivalent sen-
       sibility with a narrow liberal position that accords certain actions like civil disobedi-
       ence an overly idealized status without regard to context. My argument aims rather
       to highlight that democratic decisions about vehement protest should involve a range
       of ethical and strategic concerns infused with a sense of sublimity. It thus differs
       from both a narrow liberal argument mandating a blanket prohibition on violence,

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 775
                                                             
       on the one hand, and a fascist one where the deployment of violence is animated
       merely by strategic calculations and a sense of enthusiasm for the deed, on the other.
         The background orientation provided by such a bivalent sublimity is needed
       to provide coherence to a position like Connolly’s, with its somewhat perplexing
       notion of a violent general strike that is nevertheless to be “bloodless” (Connolly,
       2017, pp. 128–129). In short, for actors to plausibly pursue his scenario of a vehe-
       ment, but restrained, opposition, they would need to embrace something like this
       sort of sensibility. But further argument is needed for this claim to be sufficiently
       convincing. Toward that end, two additional issues have to be engaged.
         First, any claim highlighting a sense of finitude in democratic life is likely to
       meet with some wariness. Bonnie Honig has warned against the danger of what she
       calls a “mortalist humanism” that threatens to turn attention too sharply away from
       admirable, contestatory upwellings of democracy (Honig, 2013, pp. 15, 19, 26–27,
       30, 146–147). Following this sentiment, Frank similarly contends that a focus on
       finitude and the associated stress on human vulnerability efface “democratic con-
       tention” and “the importance of inspiring new assemblages of collective, demotic
       power” (Frank, 2021, pp. 9; 2009, pp. 670–671). In short, focusing on finitude
       means agonistic enthusiasm is being traded away for humility and quiescence. This
       feels like a bad exchange; and it would presumably worry Connolly as well, given
       the centrality of the notion of agonism to his work as a whole. Accordingly, my
       attempt to affirm the value of a “sobering sublime,” attached to a highlighting of
       finitude, would seem to be a dead end. Then again, maybe not.
         From time to time in Connolly’s recent work, the theme of finitude surfaces. In
       Facing the Planetary, for example, he affirms “Nietzschean explorations of mortal-
       ity…in a world of becoming” (2017, pp. 190; 2019, 88). But such statements are rel-
       atively few and scattered. To grasp the full importance of this topic for him, we need
       to return to his earlier, pathbreaking Identity\Difference (1991). There our anxiety
       about mortality is at the core of an ontology that continues to animate Connolly’s
       thought today. Significantly, that book is also where his distinctive take on agonism
       is first developed. Given the suspicions just noted about the danger that a stress on
       finitude represents for agonism, it is useful to recall its insights.
         Connolly claims there that our identity takes shape through its constitutive rela-
       tion with what it is not; in short, I don’t exist as a purely self-constituting being
       which then goes out into the world to encounter what is different. This means that
       I am not the ontological sovereign of myself. I am constitutively entangled. That
       is the source of an underlying existential ressentiment. Why is that the case? It is
       because this underlying anxiety is cathected with awareness of my mortality. The
       closer I can feel to being sovereign, the freer I feel from the bondedness of my fini-
       tude. If so, then I will continually resent the fact that the would-be sovereignty of my
       identity is always already constrained by its entanglement with others. That resent-
       ment of my condition manifests itself in a persistent “temptation” to transfigure what
       is “different” into what is “other,” with the latter being the object of abiding hostil-
       ity, underlain by a wish that this other’s impeding of my/our will could be erased
       from the world (1991, pp. ix-x, 1-3, 8-9).            
         The existential relation of identity\difference is thus a deep source of agonism in
       human affairs. And it is resilient because our anxiety about mortality is ineliminable.

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       776                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
       Although we may not be able to free ourselves from it, we can resist the persistent
       temptation to assuage that anxiety and resentment by indulging the desire to domi-
       nate the other, especially in political life, where that hostility can manifest itself in
       such horrendous ways. Connolly’s hope is that we can cultivate our sensibility in
       such a fashion as to temper this dynamic, so that we do not allow politics to slide
       from a “agonism of respect” to an imperial agonism of annihilation (1991, pp. x, 10,
       33, 166–167, 170).                                    
         This would seem to indicate that an investment in agonism is not at all incompat-
       ible with a deep embrace of mortality. It should, of course, be emphasized here that
       this relationship is, for Connolly, not conceived in theistic terms, in relation to which
       our mortal condition stands out; rather it appears against the background of an onto-
       logical picture of non-theistic being as becoming.    
         This ontology is crucial to the second issue that must be engaged if my Connolly
       interpretation is to be convincing. A critic might suggest that I am inappropriately
       bringing aspects of his early work on human identity\difference to bear on issues
       related to his later work that focuses on non-human nature and a radical politics
       of democratic response to the climate crisis. The claims arising from the former,
       including the crucial place of finitude, are, it might be argued, simply not related
       to the latter. But there is in fact a close relationship between the two. To grasp its
       character, one must attend to how the ontological background structures Connol-
       ly’s thinking on the latter issue, as well as the former. Although Connolly origi-
       nally developed the identity\difference conception primarily to think about self and
       human other, this relation should not be understood as only having a purely inter-
       human dimension. Its embeddedness in his encompassing ontology of becoming has
       significant implications for the relation of self and non-human otherness. And this
       connection allows one to see how his earlier reflections open into the concerns of
       his later work on the climate crisis, with its focus on how we need to reconceptual-
       ize our understanding of non-human nature in order to adequately comprehend and
       respond to that crisis.                               
         Understanding the process of becoming as applying to non-human nature means
       seeing the latter as characterized by a powerful and increasing dynamism. Follow-
       ing recent scientific opinion, Connolly wants to expand our comprehension of both
       the scope and speed of change in nature to include how things like ocean currents
       are being rapidly transformed by human-caused climate warming. The processes
       of non-human, natural becoming are not as fixed or slow as humans have typically
       imagined them in the Anthropocene.                    
         How does this more rapid non-human becoming relate to the identity\difference
       dynamic? The solidity of my identity is fundamentally threatened by such becoming
       in nature, especially the acceleration that results from human intervention. A stable
       and systematically pliable non-human natural world is a crucial part of the imagi-
       nary embedded in modern life. Such a world helps sustain the continued assumption
       that we can achieve an infinitely increasing mastery of nature with relatively little
       cost. But nature now appears as something more precarious or fragile in relation to
       our efforts to manipulate it and more subject to rapid becoming, especially a becom-
       ing that also demonstrates the fragility of our frameworks for human planning. This
       threatens a core component of the imagined sovereignty of modern selves, just as

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 777
                                                             
       does the existence of human others who challenge our identity (Connolly, 2013). For
       example, the human-caused warming of the climate is linked to increasingly intense
       storms and rising sea levels that threaten settled patterns of living necessary to the
       stability of the background conditions in which modern identity is anchored.
         Moreover, when we see this link between Connolly’s early account of identity
       and his later work on the climate crisis, it helps us to better understand why climate
       change deniers manifest such dogged resistance to accepting scientific facts. What
       would otherwise seem to be an obviously irrational stance gains its sense from a
       low-grade rage at the idea that natural otherness seems to be willfully assaulting the
       stability of our identity as sovereign, modern selves. Determined, increasingly vehe-
       ment denial and hostility toward those “others” who worry about fragility seem to
       be the only ways to protect the integrity of that identity and keep our finitude at bay.
         If the argument in the preceding paragraphs is valid, then there is no reason that
       the “later” Connolly should not be able to find value in a bivalent conception of the
       sublime that embodies the centrality of finitude. Such a conception would encom-
       pass the feelings of elevation, awe, and enthusiasm that can attend and help motivate
       vehement popular manifestations but do so in a way that “tempers” or sobers the
       feeling of agonism directed at our political opponents (Scudder and White, 2023, pp.
       71–106.).                                             
       Picturing a two‑fold sublime                          
                                                             
       Although I have suggested that some political phenomena, such as civil disobedi-
       ence, can model a fully bivalent feeling of sublime, it needs to be acknowledged
       that vehement democratic manifestations at a given time may be characterized pre-
       dominantly by enthusiastic turmoil, mixed with some sorts of violence, manifesting
       little apparent sense of sobriety. And that may not be inappropriate, depending on
       the intensity of the harms being contested and the goals being pursued. But, if so,
       doesn’t this mean that a feeling of the sublime in a fully bivalent sense will often not
       be readily apparent in tumultuous politics? Here, we need to recognize, as I noted
       above, that a sequence of decisions associated with collective insurgency may only
       be capable of adequate evaluation over extended periods of time, as democratic
       actions are reflected upon and moderated, thereby hopefully manifesting the increas-
       ing presence of a sobering component.                 
         Taking temporality in this sense into account helps in clarifying the distinction
       between democratic insurgent actions and proto-fascist variants. The degree to
       which the former show characteristics of a sobering sublime will be crucial to this
       judgment. Over time, democratic movements should be able to modulate their self-
       image and behavior to better align their commitment to militancy with a capacious,
       bivalent sense of sublimity.                          
         But if insurgent democratic actions are, on their own, often unlikely to immedi-
       ately manifest a full sense of sublimity, where might we look for aid in vivifying
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       778                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Fig 1 Sethembile Msezane, Chapungu: The Day Rhodes Fell (2015). See “Standing for art and truth: A
       chat with Sethembile Msezane,” TED Blog; https:// blog. ted. com/ stand ing- for- art- and- truth-a- chat- with-
       sethe mbile- mseza ne/                                
                                                             
       and cultivating such a compound feeling that might then be brought to bear on our
       judgments of political action? There are, of course, vivid historical examples of full
       manifestations of a two-fold sublimity. It is important to keep these alive in public
       memory. Here, I have already mentioned civil disobedience in the 1950s and 1960s.
       Similarly, we can look to events like the Boston Tea Party, attending especially to
       how it represented great popular enthusiasm balanced with a remarkable attention
       to minimizing bloodshed.11 But we should also attend to how aesthetic representa-
       tions can provide us with images that can evoke both senses of the sublime simul-
       taneously. As an example, consider the public enactments of the contemporary
       South African performance artist, Sethembile Msezane. In one of her works (Fig 1),
       she inserted herself into a setting of enthusiastic collective democratic action that
       occurred at the University of Cape Town during the dismantling and removal of a
       large statue of Cecil Rhodes in 2015.                 
         On one level, her appearance might appear to fit seamlessly with the crowd’s
       enthusiastic sense of sublimity at the toppling of this prominent figure in South
                                                             
       11 In this regard, Benjamin Carp’s Defiance of the Patriots (2010) is exemplary.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 779
                                                             
       Africa’s racist history. Clad as an eagle, she seems to soar triumphantly above the
       scene of Rhodes being toppled. And yet Msezane clearly wants to strike, as well, a
       note of sobriety. The bird she is mimicking is the Chapungu, a species that is threat-
       ened today in South Africa. And the easy enthusiasm of the crowd snapping photo-
       graphs is juxtaposed to what Msezane clearly intended to be a long, grueling ordeal
       for herself. This and other performances she has staged portray a sense of the vul-
       nerability, precarity, and pain of the human body, especially the black female body
       in the history of that country. The suffering is intended as part of the drama of these
       performances. As she said of her condition when she stepped off the plinth after
       hours in 90-degree-F weather: “By the time I came down, I was shaking and experi-
       encing sunstroke. But I also felt a burst of life inside” (Msezane, 2020).12
       A sobering sublime and connolly’s appeal to sorel’s general strike
                                                             
       If my reflections so far have lent the notion of a sobering aspect of sublimity some
       general plausibility, what exactly is its specific value for Connolly’s take on what
       is to be done to contest our current political threats? He points us to two general
       strategies: The “politics of swarming” and the “cross-regional general strike.”13 The
       former refers to multiple forms of local knowledge-building, sensibility tuning, and
       organizing to draw together diverse constituencies who have a stake in combatting
       present ills. This idea seems plausible and admirable. But how do we imagine such a
       multifaceted “rhizomatic complex” of activity binding itself into the form of a vehe-
       ment collective insurgency (Connolly, 2017, pp. 12, 120)? We need some way of
       animating the motivation of “dispersed participants” so that they coalesce into the
       “perfect storm” of a general strike. Such motivation “dissolves the sense of being
       neutralized by the everyday practices of capitalism” and vivifies “the prospect of
       acting collectively” (Connolly, 2017, pp. 129, 148).  
         Crucial to generating the needed motivation for such an eruption is the looming
       image of the general strike presented in Sorel’s Reflections on Violence, published
       in 1908. As Connolly says, Sorel makes clear “how such a … myth…can sharpen
       needed energies and divisions” between “us” and “them” and motivate insurgent
       collective action (Connolly, 2017, p. 130). Sorel looked to this myth to weld the
       working class into a monolithic “terrifying” weapon of “war” (1961, pp. 274–275).
         Connolly thus turns to the general strike for its force as a mythic image of a polit-
       ical upheaval. He lauds Sorel for his “projection of a vision” intended to “mobilize
       [people] to act” (2017, p. 147). Sorel emphasized that the sense and power of this
       vision could not be transmitted by reasoned explication (1961, pp. 122–124). It was
       to move an audience of workers by its visceral, aesthetic-affective appeal to their
                                                             
                                                             
       12 For a more extended analysis of other, similar performances of Msezane, as well as ones with com-
       parable evocations of bivalent sublimity by Kehinde Wiley, see White (2025); see also Msezane (2017).
       13 Although the notion of a general strike is discussed at greatest length in chapter five of Connolly
       (2017), he continues, more recently, to affirm it in Connolly (2022, p. 141).
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       780                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
       imagination to enthusiastically take up the violent task of the revolutionary over-
       throw of capitalism.14                                
         But immediately after announcing his investment in Sorel’s central idea, Con-
       nolly begins a process of significant qualification. This is where the trajectory of his
       thinking gets problematic. The reason is that we are first incited to cathect with a
       powerful, visceral image of a volcanic, lethal, explosion whose appeal exceeds rea-
       son; but then we are provided with an opposing list of reason-based cautions. We are
       accordingly told to look to insights from other thinkers like Gandhi on nonviolence,
       cautioned that such a strike must be “bloodless,” and informed that the unified fist
       of Sorelian opposition must rather take the form of “pluralist assemblages” moving
       in “slow motion” (Connolly, 2017, pp. 128–129). In sum, participants in Connolly’s
       general strike are incited to be furiously enthusiastic in collectively toppling the pil-
       lars of the contemporary economic-political order, but then abruptly told to restrain
       themselves with cautious, rational qualifications.    
         My point in emphasizing the sharp contrast between the visceral appeal to a
       mythic versus the subsequent rational chastening of it is not meant to question Con-
       nolly’s cautions themselves. In fact, I agree with them. Rather what I want to high-
       light is the striking divergence between his declaration of a need to move beyond
       reason alone by looking to the aesthetic-affective power of the mythic, on the one
       hand, followed by his announcement that we must radically deflate that aesthetic-
       affective force with reason alone, on the other. Here, ironically, Connolly could be
       his own best critic, given his assertions about the unpersuasiveness of any thinking
       that fails to acknowledge the persistent force of aesthetic-affective dynamics in poli-
       tics. I want to suggest that we embrace an alternative way of proceeding here that
       might allow a better negotiation of this problem—but do so in a way that neverthe-
       less respects the deepest commitments of Connolly’s thought. This will, however,
       require an openness on his part to embracing the language of sublimity.
         With that goal in mind, let me begin by noting that although Connolly appeals to
       the power of Sorel’s aesthetic-affective framing, he curiously does not pick up on
       the latter’s explicit binding of his myth of collective action with the feeling of the
       sublime. For example, Sorel refers to the “sublime work” of revolutionary action
       and urges us to see how the myth of the general strike is “capable of inspiring sub-
       limity” (pp. 139, 214–215, 275). I assume that Connolly’s inattention to this usage
       in Sorel is not intentional, but rather simply an oversight. Perhaps, however, instead
       of either overlooking Sorel’s sublime or simply adopting it, one could here embrace
       a bivalent notion of sublimity. This might help avoid enhancing the danger of freely
       accelerating violence and bloodshed in popular insurgency through the depletion of
       some dimensions of its motivational power; in short, we would be looking for an
       14 My concerns about violence in this context do not constitute an argument against the idea of a gen-
       eral strike itself, nor against the idea of affirming a mythic dimension in democratic theory. My focus is
       merely on the problems that emerge from Connolly’s appeal to Sorel’s specific account of the general
       strike. Regarding my views on the importance of a mythic dimension in democratic theory, see Scudder
       and White (2023, pp. 106–170.                         
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 781
                                                             
       influence on our visceral, aesthetic-affective register, rather than solely to prudential
       dictates.                                             
         This criticism of Connolly is not a categorical claim that one cannot bring aes-
       thetic-affective sensibility into a relation with rational-moral cautions. As my discus-
       sion of Burke and Kant noted, there has typically been an entanglement of the two
       in discussions of sublimity. And Connolly similarly promotes combining appeals to
       our sensibility with “refined processes of reflection” (2017a, pp. xxi-xxii, 84). My
       objection is rather that in his invocation of a general strike the aesthetic-affective
       force he appeals to is diametrically opposed to his rational-moral reflections. All of
       the force on the visceral register is on the side of Sorel’s sublime mythic image. It is
       no secret that his demotion of reason in this formulation of what I have been calling
       an exclusively enthusing sublime is something that undemocratic characters, starting
       with Mussolini, have found attractive.15              
         Now Connolly, as noted above, is acutely aware that “there is never a vacuum on
       the visceral register of affective communication” (2017a, p. 17). But his formula-
       tions seem to leave just such a vacuum in the democratic sensorium that he wants so
       much to help cultivate. If one is to effectively fight fascism’s visceral strength, then
       one must draw some resources from that same register. Connolly clearly does not
       want to follow Sorel’s simple, enthusiastic embrace of violence, but his caution in
       this regard needs to be better supported by insights about the cultivation of an appro-
       priate countervailing sensibility.                    
         As Connolly says repeatedly, fascism is a threat we must “counter on the visceral
       register” (2017a, p. 19). But what then might provide the positive, aesthetic-affective
       source of such a counterforce? It is here that turning to the sobering dimension of
       sublimity can be helpful, especially when it is interpreted in terms of the ontological
       grounding that Connolly has so compellingly sketched in his earlier work. There the
       self is imagined as continually and consciously negotiating its finitude by resisting
       the temptation to transform difference into otherness, a tendency that is generated by
       our modern, perpetually renewed tendency to repress any abiding acknowledgement
       of our mortality. A resistant attitude here would reflect and help manifest an attach-
       ment to being as becoming, in the sense that our orientation to difference would
       now acknowledge that condition of the world by expressing a “presumptive generos-
       ity” and “agonistic respect” toward the continual becoming of difference (2005, p.
       31;1991, p. x).                                       
         This ontological scene, and the proto narrative it supports, together provide a
       positive, existential framing for affirming and cultivating a sobering dimension of
       sublimity. And that cultivation would help us to feel motivated not just by sublime
       enthusiasm for collective action in the pursuit of democratic political goals, but also
       by an abiding resistance to the temptations to self-righteousness and certainty that
       feed a sense of unlimited, iron willfulness. As Connolly has noted, fascism revels
       in images of the “armored male” body imagining itself capable of annihilating any
       obstacle to its will (2017a, pp. 53–58, 84–86). He highlighted this deep association
       15 Mussolini stressed his debt to Sorel, saying he was crucial in helping him to learn how to build “the
       energy and power of … fascist cohorts,” quoted in Edward Shils’s introduction to Sorel (1961, p. 24).
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       782                                       S. K. White 
                                                             
       well before the January 6, 2021 insurrection in Washington, when we witnessed so
       many of Trump’s enthusiastic male co-conspirators proudly clad in full tactical mili-
       tary armor. Contrast that with the vulnerable, but courageous, body as it appears in
       Msezane’s performances.                               
                                                             
       Conclusion                                            
                                                             
       The armored male of a fascist mythic has a clarifying, romantic, almost transcen-
       dental affinity for violence and bloodshed.16 How might folding in a sensitivity for
       the sobering sublime help a democratic political mythic—Connolly’s as well as oth-
       ers—to resist the pull of such a sensibility in the context of engaging in vehement
       collective action? Being receptive to a sobering sublimity does not bring us to any
       absolute prohibition on violence and possible bloodshed. They may in fact become
       necessary in pressing circumstances. But the cultivation of a sensibility animated
       by a bivalent sublime might help lessen our propensity to imagine violent action
       as a pure medium for exhilaration, self-cleansing, and an iron transcendence of the
       complexities of politics. More precisely, it should better dispose us to feel the dif-
       ference between violence and bloodshed as attractive lures, on the one hand, and as
       occasionally grim necessities, on the other.          
       Acknowledgements The author would like to thank the participants in a conference at Johns Hopkins
       University in November 2023, honoring William E. Connolly’s work, for their insights and reactions to
       an early draft of this paper. Thanks are also due to, Kathy Ferguson, Ross Mittiga, Smita Rahman, and
       two anonymous reviewers for their insights, and to Sam Chambers for his astute editorial suggestions.
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
       use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
       sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
       licenses/by/4.0/.                                     
       References                                            
       Adams, John. (1773) From John Adams to James Warren, 17 December 1773.” https:// found ers. archi ves. gov/
         docum ents/ Adams/ 06- 02- 02- 0001.                
       Adams, J. (1964) In L.H. Butterfield (ed.) Diary and autobiography of John Adams. Atheneum, pp.
         1771–1781.                                          
       Boulton, J.T. (1958) Editor’s introduction. In E. Burke (ed.) A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our
         ideas of the sublime and the beautiful. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
                                                             
       16 “Steel romanticism” was a term Goebbels particularly liked; quoted in Wackerfuss (2013, p. 298).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Imagining democratic insurgency: enthusiasm, sublimity,… 783
                                                             
       Burke, E. (1987) In J.G.A. Pocock (ed.) Reflections on the revolution in France. Hackett.
       Burke, E. (1990) In A. Phillips (ed.) A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime and
         beautiful. Oxford University Press.                 
       Carp, B.L. (2010) Defiance of the patriots: The Boston tea party and the making of America. Yale University
         Press.                                              
       Clewis, R. (2009) The Kantian sublime and the revelation of freedom. Cambridge University Press.
       Connolly, W.E. (1991) Identity\Difference: Democratic negotiation of political paradox. University of Min-
         nesota Press.                                       
       Connolly, W.E. (2005) Pluralism. Duke University Press.
       Connolly, W.E. (2013) The fragility of things: Self-Organizing processes, neoliberal fantasies, and demo-
         cratic activism. Duke University Press.             
       Connolly, W.E. (2017a) Facing the planetary: Entangled humanism and the politics of swarming. Duke Uni-
         versity Press.                                      
       Connolly, W.E. (2017b) Aspirational fascism: The struggle for multifaceted democracy under trumpism. Uni-
         versity of Minnesota Press.                         
       Connolly, W.E. (2019) Climate machines, fascist drives and truth. Duke University Press.
       Connolly, W.E. (2022) Resounding events: Adventures of an academic from the working class. Duke Univer-
         sity Press.                                         
       Frank, J. (2021) The democratic sublime: On aesthetics and popular assembly. Oxford University Press.
       Honig, B. (2013) Antigone, interrupted. Cambridge University Press.
       Huet, M.-H. (1994) The revolutionary sublime. Eighteenth Century Studies 28(1): 51–64.
       Jennings, J. (1985) Georges Sorel: The character and development of his thought. Macmillan.
       Junger, E. (2008) On Pain, trans. In C. David (ed.) Durst with a preface by Russell Berman. Telos.
       Kant, I. (1974) In W. Weischedel (ed.) Kritik der Urteilskraft. Suhrkamp.
       Kant, I. (1991) A renewed attempt to answer the question: Is the human race continually improving? In H.
         Reiss (ed.) Political writings. Cambridge University Press, pp. 177–190.
       Kant, I. (2000) In P. Guyer (ed.) Critique of the power of judgment trans. Paul Guyer and Eric Matthews.
         Cambridge University Press.                         
       Kant, I. (2011) In P. Frierson and P. Guyer (eds.) Observations on the feeling of the beautiful and sublime and
         other writings. Cambridge University Press.         
       King, Martin Luther Jr. 1963. https:// www. africa. upenn. edu/ Artic les_ Gen/ Letter_ Birmi ngham. html
       Lyotard, J.-F. (1989) The Sublime and the Avant-Garde. In A. Benjamin (ed.) The lyotard reader. Blackwell.
       Msezane, Sethembile. (2017) https:// blog. ted. com/ stand ing- for- art- and- truth-a- chat- with- sethe mbile- mseza
         ne/.                                                
       Msezane, Sethembile. (2020) https:// ideas. ted. com/ we- dont- need- statu es- we- can- prese rve- our- histo ry- in -
         more- memor able- ways/.                            
       O’Neill, D.I. (2012) The sublime, the beautiful, and the political in Burke’s work. In K. Vermeir and M.F.
         Deckard (eds.) The science of sensibility reading Burke’s philosophical inquiry. Springer, pp. 193–221.
       Pineda, E. (2021) Seeing like an activist: Civil disobedience and the civil rights movement. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Rancière, J. (2011) The thinking of Dissensus: Politics and aesthetics. In P. Bowman and R. Stamp (eds.)
         Readingm Rancière. Continuum, pp. 1–17.             
       Scudder, M.F. and White, S.K. (2023) The two faces of democracy: Decentering agonism and deliberation.
         Oxford University Press.                            
       Shapiro, M.J. (2018) The political sublime. Duke University Press.
       Sorel, G. (1961) In E. Shils (ed.) Reflections on violence, trans T. E. Hulme and J. Roth. NY: Collier, pp. 5–6.
       Stanley, J. (ed.) (2020) How fascism works: The politics of Us and them. Random House.
       Wackerfuss, A. (2013) The myth of the unknown storm trooper: Selling SA stories in the third Reich. Central
         European History 46: 298–324.                       
       White, S.K. (1994) Edmund Burke: Modernity, politics, and aesthetics. Sage.
       White, S.K. (2000) Sustaining affirmation: The strengths of weak ontology in political theory. Princeton Uni-
         versity Press.                                      
       White, S.K. (2025) The aesthetics of democratic power: sensibility, normativity and the sublime.
         Constellations.                                     

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       784                                       S. K. White 
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
       institutional affiliations.                           
                                                             
       Stephen K. White is the James Hart Professor of Politics Emeritus at the University of Virginia. He is the
       author of numerous articles and books, the most recent of which is The Two Faces of Democracy: Decen-
       tering Agonism and Deliberation, with Mary F. Scudder (Oxford University Press, 2023).
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             