[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:838–841       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00765-w            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Race, time, and utopia: critical theory and the process
       of emancipation                                       
                                                             
       William M. Paris Oxford University Press, New York, 2025, xi+272pp.,
       ISBN: 978-0197698877                                  
                                                             
       Charles Battaglini1                                   
                                                             
       Published online: 12 June 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       William M. Paris’s book Race, Time, and Utopia provides a perceptive, original, and
       conceptually rich analysis of the struggle toward emancipatory forms of life and the
       abolition of racial oppression. The book’s main claim is that utopia forms a criti-
       cal theory used in black political thought to break with the domination of historical
       racialized practices and begin a new time. Paris makes several theoretical and con-
       ceptual innovations. First, he offers a new conception of utopia not as a blueprint for
       an ideal society, but as a response to problems in social life that break the grip of
       existing justification and formulate possible future forms of life, a ‘not-yet’ instead
       of a ‘not-place’ (pp. 2, 9, 216). Second, he presents an analysis of racial injustice as
       a domination of time. Domination crystalizes a non-synchronous time, the discrep-
       ancy of the predominant temporality in a society with that of marginalized classes,
       through social practices and institutions in a way that reinforce the alienation felt by
       the dominated and hinders them from negotiating, challenging, and transforming the
       practical organization of their time (pp. 12–14, 59–62).
         This crystallized non-synchronicity of time entails a form of unfreedom as arbi-
       trary interferences, like the imposition of a certain labor time. But it also exercises
       control over one’s identity, history, and future, arbitrarily stipulating an unsurpass-
       able horizon (pp. 12–18). Utopian projects build on marginalized temporalities to
       force upon the present a new horizon, an alternative space of reason, justification,
       and norms (p. 111). The book aims to diagnose and conceptualize racial injustice as
       a form of temporal domination in order to formulate resources to create emancipa-
       tory forms of life.                                   
         Chapter 1 reflects on the central problem of social change and why it is so dif-
       ficult to build durable constituencies to struggle for racial justice. The book then
       illustrates, with Du Bois’s work, the idea of non-synchronicity of time. Chapter 3
       *                                                     
         Charles Battaglini                                  
         cbattaglini@iona.edu                                
       1 Iona University, New Rochelle, NY 10804, USA        
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race, time, and utopia: critical theory and the process of… 839
                                                             
       turns toward the black nationalism of Delany and Garvey as a utopian yearning to
       open up futures foreclosed by the racial domination of time. Chapter 4 discusses the
       concept of racial fetishism in Fanon’s writings as the anchoring of past injustice into
       present societal structures. Chapter 5 focuses on James Boggs’s work, which locates
       racism in capitalist structures and presents black power as an alternative form of life
       based on solidarity.                                  
         The book engages with the debates around social change, hegemony, and counter-
       hegemony. Paris contributes to these literatures by asking how utopia, as a form of
       social critique and political imaginary, can produce resources to transform oppres-
       sive institutions and social practices. He intervenes in the specific question of why
       the status quo is so resilient despite recurrent social, economic, and political crises.
       Paris makes the conceptual distinction between crisis-consciousness and utopian-
       consciousness. Crisis-consciousness is the lived experience and realization of the
       unjustifiability of a form of life (pp. 36–38). Utopian-consciousness, instead, is the
       insight into the structural possibilities of a form of life not yet lived (p. 43). Both
       forms of consciousness are necessary conditions for social change; people need to
       grasp the failure of their form of life, but also envision a potential alternative life in
       order to come into a movement to bring about change.  
         With the idea of utopian-consciousness, Paris also intervenes in debates over
       ideology-critique and the attempt to move away from a conception of ideology as
       a form of manipulation. The idea of utopian-consciousness explains why a form
       of life may remain in place even though beliefs about the legitimacy of the system
       may have shifted significantly through the emergence of crisis-consciousness (pp.
       29, 30). Instead of ill-will or manipulation, inaction may be the rational response
       of agents aware of injustice but who see no other plausible way to reorganize social
       life.                                                 
         Paris develops this idea further in Chapter 4, where he discusses Fanon and the
       concept of racial fetishism. He argues that this is not a form of mind control or col-
       lective delusion; it is instead an objectified set of justifications that appear to be
       unassailable (pp. 147, 149, 150). In this sense, racial domination and ideologies are
       not reducible to forms of cognition, but rather entail structures, practices, memories,
       and habits sedimented from the past that shape current practice and impose a mean-
       ing on society (p. 151). This fetishism, despite being a social product, forecloses
       the future, ingraining present forms of life even though many people across society
       know that such a form of life is unjustifiable. To open up the future requires more
       than asserting the equality of all citizens; it requires a collective estrangement from
       those forms of life that have been taken to be natural to move toward a structural
       transformation of society (p. 162).                   
         The need for structural transformation is fleshed out in Chapter 5, which dis-
       cusses Boggs’s conception of black power and presents racism as anchored in capi-
       talist social relations. According to Boggs, the capitalist logic of accumulation gives
       justificatory reasons that can only lead to ‘power over’, to exploitation and raciali-
       zation (pp. 189, 196, 197, 208). The struggle for civil rights is bound to be inef-
       fective in bringing about equality and solidarity because its narrow focus on rights
       functions within the justificatory space of class society (pp. 198–202). In contrast,
       black power rejects integration in class society; instead, it forms through cadre

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       840                                      C. Battaglini
                                                             
       organizations an autonomous political space that organizes black citizens around a
       counterpower based on norms of solidarity (p.212). Black power rejects integration
       in American, i.e., capitalist, society, but it builds a ground of solidarity across races,
       including workers from all ethnicities. Boggs casts this project as the self-conscious
       inheritance of a trans-ethnic revolutionary history from the French Revolution to the
       anti-colonial movements, making black power a revolutionary ideology instead of
       an ethnic ideology (p. 214).                          
         Finally, Paris makes a nuanced and insightful contribution to the literature that
       focuses on the different authors discussed in the book. In doing so, Paris does not
       compromise between the broader project and an in-depth analysis of individual
       scholars. For example, Paris contributes to the debate in the Du Boisian scholarship
       around his conception of leadership, with some arguing that he abandons his focus
       on the Talented Tenth in later writings, while others argue that he kept this top-down
       conception of politics throughout his life. Paris acknowledges that Du Bois does
       have problematic elitist elements in his conception of leadership, but he also makes
       the case that his early writings, like The Souls of Black Folk, already problematize
       the vanguard status of the Talented Tenth (p. 84). Paris argues that Du Bois sees the
       Talented Tenth not as saving the black masses through their education but as being
       saved by the masses from double consciousness through their cultural practices that
       express another form of life (p.93).                  
         However, for all the strengths of the book, and despite the thought-provoking
       reconceptualization of the concept utopia, I remain hesitant whether utopia is the
       best term to capture the project Paris is referring to. By equating utopia with the
       ‘bursting asunder of ideological bonds of justification’ (p. 216), Paris ends up talk-
       ing about something different from utopia instead of uncovering a new truth about
       this concept. Admittedly, there is something to utopia as the imagination of alterna-
       tive societies that helps us unlearn our habits of naturalizing the present, but is that
       not a feature of imagination more generally? What seems unique to utopia is that, if
       not a blueprint, it does offer a glimpse of the ultimately just society, and that prom-
       ise of peace, justice, and happiness. Paris is right to argue that theorists, maybe in
       contrast to artists, should refrain from formulating such an image since it could fore-
       close alternative forms of life (pp. 2, 220, 222, 223). But is it still utopia?
         Furthermore, because Paris emphasizes the open-endedness of his project and
       the idea that it is grounded in existing subaltern practice, the project bears closer
       resemblance to Antonio Gramsci’s Sorelian myth—a concrete phantasy that acts on
       a shattered people organizing their passion into a collective will—or Deva Woodly’s
       pragmatic imagination—a creative divergence from habitual paths that formulates a
       bridge between present and future condition—than to what is often seen as utopia
       (Gramsci, 1971, p. 126; Woodly, 2022, pp. 52, 53). In all fairness, these other con-
       cepts have their own limitations. For example, using the term utopia would avoid the
       connotation of reformism that the term pragmatism carries (p. 35). I hope to hear
       more from Paris in further works about what sets his concept of utopia apart from
       these other terms.                                    
         But all things considered, whether one calls it utopia, pragmatic imagination, or
       Sorelian myth, Paris offers a persuasive account of the importance and resources in
       black political thought of formulating ‘not-yet’ forms of social life in order to free

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race, time, and utopia: critical theory and the process of… 841
                                                             
       the future from contemporary norms and practices of racial and capitalist domina-
       tion. Therefore Race, Time, and Utopia is an excellent, thought-provoking book that
       will be relevant for scholars of ideology, critical theory, and black political thought.
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Gramsci, A. (1971) Selections from the prison notebooks. In Q. Hoare and G. Nowell-Smith (eds.) The
         applied theatre reader. International Publishers.   
       Woodly, D. (2022) Reckoning. Oxford University Press. 
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             