[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:850–853       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00766-9            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       The two faces of democracy: decentering agonism       
       and deliberation                                      
                                                             
       Mary F. Scudder and Stephen K. White Oxford University Press, New
       York, 2023, 197pp., ISBN 9780197623886                
                                                             
       Max P. Rozenburg1                                     
                                                             
       Published online: 18 June 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Democracy is characterised by both deliberation and agonism: by convergence as
       well as contestation. On the one hand, democratic institutions such as parliament,
       the academy, and the media facilitate the popular discussions that help legitimise
       our shared social order; on the other, democracy involves the contestation of unjust
       or illegitimate social arrangements through protests, direct action and, at times, vio-
       lence. In their book, Mary Scudder and Stephen White give substance to the com-
       monplace intuition that both deliberation and conflict play crucial roles in building
       and maintaining a legitimate democratic order, and argue that the central value of
       ‘moral equality of voice’ should guide us in determining the most appropriate demo-
       cratic expression at a given juncture.                
         Scudder and White position their contribution against the backdrop of an ongo-
       ing debate between proponents of deliberative and agonist models of democracy.
       Advocates of the former, who argue that legitimacy arises through reasoned discus-
       sion, are often blind to the corrupting effects of structural injustices and power rela-
       tions on deliberative processes. Conversely, advocates of the latter, who emphasise
       that the essence of politics is the struggle against political adversaries, often under-
       play the importance of shared, democratically legitimised restraints on that conflict.
       Scudder and White seek to preserve the strengths of both models, while compensat-
       ing for their respective weaknesses, by integrating them into what they refer to as
       a ‘communicative model of democracy’. While this exercise produces a number of
       useful and critical insights, Scudder and White, in my opinion, are unsuccessful in
       their aim of bringing the two models together.        
         Bridging the gap between deliberative and agonist models of democracy first
       requires a broad reappraisal of both, to pull them away from the clutches of their
       most puritan proponents and to identify the grounds on which the two models may
       *                                                     
         Max P. Rozenburg                                    
         max.rozenburg@newcastle.ac.uk                       
       1 University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The two faces of democracy: decentering agonism and… 851
                                                             
       interrelate. Scudder and White take up this task in the first three substantive chapters
       of their book (chs 2, 3, and 4). In chapter 2, they critically reconstruct the delibera-
       tive turn in democratic theory, drawing on the works of Jürgen Habermas, Joshua
       Cohen, Simone Chambers, and Iris Marion Young. They demonstrate that since
       its inception, deliberative democratic theory has been trying to identify the type of
       communication that can generate legitimate political decisions in the face of differ-
       ence and disagreement.                                
         Scudder and White emphasise that, over the years, deliberative democratic theory
       has abandoned its narrow, overly rationalistic understanding of ‘appropriate’ com-
       munication—its ‘straitjacket of rational discourse’ (p. 37)—and embraced a much
       more ecumenical understanding of deliberation. This expanded conception includes
       greeting, rhetoric, storytelling, as well as the communicative interactions of eve-
       ryday life, and has culminated in the emergent ‘systemic approach to deliberative
       democracy’, which sees deliberation as ‘a communicative activity that occurs across
       multiple, interlinked, but functionally differentiated sites’ (p. 40). While this nar-
       rative, tracing the development of deliberative theory from Habermas to the delib-
       erative system, will offer little new to those working within the field, Scudder and
       White present their reconstruction with great lucidity, and offer a valuable introduc-
       tion for those unfamiliar with the deliberative democratic canon.
         Chapter 3 is more directly relevant to specialists. It addresses the charges of ‘nor-
       mative unmooring’ and ‘concept stretching’ that have been levied against the more
       expansive understandings of deliberative democracy in general, and the systemic
       turn in particular. Some misguided puritans (most notably David Owen and Graham
       Smith), whose conceptual gerrymandering ultimately limits deliberative democ-
       racy’s transformative potential, cling to the reductive understanding of deliberation
       associated with ‘deliberative forums’: those ‘discrete practices of deliberation’ (p.
       46) in which all deliberative desiderata need to be met at the same time. Scudder
       and White convincingly show why it is neither feasible nor desirable to prioritise the
       practice of deliberation over the property of deliberativeness in complex political
       systems (pp. 62–68), as the practice of deliberation by itself cannot guarantee that
       ‘decisions are arrived at through inclusive communication among those who will
       be affected by them’ (p. 65). Scudder and White therefore propose to ‘decentre the
       practice of deliberation’, and instead encourage deliberative democrats to critically
       interrogate all the complex, informal, and diffuse ways in which opinion and will
       formation occurs.                                     
         With this more broadly conceived ‘communicative model of democracy’ in mind,
       Scudder and White turn to democracy’s ‘agonist face’ in chapter 4 to explore how
       certain conflictual expressions of democracy might contribute to a ‘moral equal-
       ity of voice’ and, by extension, the normative core of deliberative democracy. To
       this end, they reconstruct the agonist model of democracy, drawing on the works of
       Chantal Mouffe, William Connolly, and Bonnie Honig. They highlight that Mouffe’s
       earlier, more ‘imperialising’ formulation of agonism is grounded in a Schmittian
       political ontology that defines politics as an essential struggle between ‘friends’
       and ‘enemies’. Scudder and White argue that this ontological stance is incompat-
       ible with Mouffe’s concurrent commitment to the ‘ethico-political principles of
       liberal democracy’. As they rhetorically ask: ‘Why would someone whose basic

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       852                                     M. P. Rozenburg
                                                             
       existential-ontological understanding of the world is framed in terms of friends
       and enemies not violate norms of liberty and equality whenever protecting one’s
       “friends” seems necessary?’ (p. 81). Connolly and Honig, by contrast, are seen as
       adopting a ‘weak’ political ontology, which similarly acknowledges the impulse to
       differentiate but also makes (some) room for a justice orientation rooted in equality
       and autonomy that to some extent constrains political conflict. Scudder and White
       ultimately contend that this ‘tempered agonism’ aligns more consistently with the
       normative core of deliberative democracy.             
         While the fourth chapter offers a cogent reconstruction of the agonist model of
       democracy, it also raises concerns about the book’s framing. Scudder and White
       present their work as bridging the gap between agonist and deliberative models,
       suggesting that both contribute somewhat equally to the ‘communicative model of
       democracy’ that they construct. However, chapter 4 reveals that while they affirm
       the commonplace intuition that disagreement, conflict, and contestation are essen-
       tial to a healthy democracy, Scudder and White also believe that agonism’s broader
       ontological and normative commitments sit uncomfortably with the deliberative
       democratic architectonic and, crucially, with the communicative model they them-
       selves propose. For Scudder and White, conflict is valuable, not for agonist reasons,
       but only insofar it serves the normative core of deliberative democracy. In that sense,
       they do not successfully integrate agonism and deliberation on equal terms. Rather,
       they subordinate the former to the latter.            
         What is more, it seems to me that, in chapter 4, Scudder and White conflate the
       agonist model of democracy (which they broadly reject) with discrete practices
       of contestation (which they rightly value)—or at least assume that the former is
       required to justify the latter. It is, however, unnecessary to invoke agonism to dem-
       onstrate that disagreement, protests, strikes, and direct action have democratic and
       deliberative value. In fact, as Scudder and White themselves argue in chapters 2 and
       3, deliberative democracy is a complex, informal, and diffuse communicative pro-
       cess grounded in the moral significance of difference and disagreement, with con-
       flict playing a critical role in both actual and ideal processes of opinion and will
       formation, carving out plenty of space to validate practices of contestation without
       having to rely on a (weak) agonist political ontology. Scudder and White’s reliance
       on the agonist model, in my opinion, distracts from the purpose of their argument: to
       reclaim conflict and contestation for the broader deliberative agenda.
         These issues are further underscored in the last two chapters of the book, in which
       Scudder and White formulate an ‘originary exemplary scene’ that elucidates the
       ‘normative core of communicative democracy’, namely ‘moral equality of voice’, by
       drawing on and departing from the works of Habermas. Scudder and White them-
       selves admit that this ‘hardly seems like a promising avenue for imagining an exem-
       plary scene that can vivify agonism as emphatically as it would deliberation’ (p.
       146) and in that, they are right—but this issue arises only because they themselves
       impose that expectation on their work. If the book had expressed the more mod-
       est aim of showing how and when contestatory practices hold normative value in a
       deliberative system, it would have easily met its own standards. Scudder and White
       convincingly show that the ability to contest symbolic reproduction in a way that is
       animated by an aspirational ethical core of convergence and reparation lies at the

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The two faces of democracy: decentering agonism and… 853
                                                             
       heart of a more ‘radicalised communicative model of democracy’ (p. 150)—and that
       is an important insight in its own right.             
         While the book’s ambition to enable convergence between agonists and delibera-
       tive democrats is admirable, I am doubtful that it will speak to agonists in the way it
       aspires to. But this is still an insightful piece of work which makes a very important
       contribution to deliberative democratic theory in general, and the systemic approach
       to deliberative democracy in particular, by drawing deliberative democracy’s norma-
       tive core away from deliberative practices and recentring its attention on its Haber-
       masian roots, showing how conflict and contestation play a crucial role in achieving
       communicative legitimacy and, ultimately, a just society.
                                                             
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             