[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:30            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00807-x            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille
       Mbembe: restitutive justice struggles and the colonial
       ‘dispositif of a thing’                               
                                                             
                                                             
       Magdalena Zolkos1                                     
                                                             
       Accepted: 27 September 2025                           
       © The Author(s) 2026                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       Struggles for postcolonial restitution of heritage objects held in museums and other
       knowledge institutions in the west have challenged the legal and regulatory frame-
       works securing the collections’ integrity and unseizability and they have oppugned
       the epistemological power dynamics that manifest through the re-semanticization
       of the acquisitioned and confiscated objects as ‘mere things’. Drawing attention to
       the contrast between the international legal discourse of cultural property and what
       I call ‘refractory speech acts’ deployed by activists, artists and spokespersons from
       Indigenous communities within restitutive justice movements, I turn to political
       theories of Roberto Esposito and of Achille Mbembe to outline the critique of the
       epistemological power of western museums through the conceptual rubric of the
       ‘dispositif of a thing’ and to explore the possibilities for counter-action and alterna-
       tive (non-Eurocentric and non-anthropocentric) understandings emerging through
       restitutive struggles today. Ultimately, I argue that the language, art and political
       action instantiated by these struggles are decolonizing practices that challenge the
       binary separation between persons and things, which offer a richer, and more po-
       litically radical, understanding of restitution beyond property relations and transfer
       of ownership.                                         
       Keywords Postcolonial heritage restitution · Dispositif of a thing · Decolonizing
       museums · Roberto esposito · Achille mbembe           
                                                             
                                                             
                              Power concedes nothing without a demand.
                                       Frederick Douglass, 1857.
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Magdalena Zolkos                                    
         magdalena.a.zolkos@jyu.fi                           
       1 University of Jyväskylä, FI-40014 Jyvaskyla, Finland
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 2 of 20                          M. Zolkos   
                                                             
         Restitution of heritage objects that belong to colonized groups and societies and
       that are currently held in western collections and museums, is a pressing and ongo-
       ing issue globally. Heritage returns are regulated by international legal instruments
       developed by UNESCO in 1954 and 1970 and by UNIDROIT in 1995, and they
       center on the discourse of ownership rights and frame the objects as inanimate cul-
       tural property acquisitioned through looting or theft, primarily during armed conflicts
       (Prażmowska-Marcinowska, 2022; Roodt, 2025). The language used by participants
       of restitutive justice struggles—artists, activists, communal spokespersons—is strik-
       ingly at odds with the international discourse of cultural property; for one, they fre-
       quently deploy much richer conceptions of thinghood, including those grounded in
       Indigenous cosmologies and ontologies, and divorced from the ideas of objects as
       property or as ‘servile tools’ of human persons (De Line, 2018; Rosiek et al., 2020;
       Bruchac, 2024; Amo-Agyemang, 2024). Numerous speakers have emphasized rela-
       tionality and mutual entanglement of human and other-than-human beings and have
       recognized the objects’ spiritual and ancestral meanings and their capacities to exert
       effects in the world (see Victoria Hunt in Zolkos, 2025). One example of such per-
       sonification of the disputed heritage items in restitutive justice speech acts is when
       their legal belonging to western museums and universities is articulated as ‘impris-
       onment’ and ‘hostage-taking’; another example is the deployment of the language of
       release, disenclosure welcome and homecoming, rather than reappropriation, in the
       cases of successful repatriations (Chuchu & Ngumi, 2023; Ngumi, 2022). In notable
       instances, the items themselves are addressed as interlocutors and acknowledged as
       potent presences and ancestral beings who are mourned and greeted on their return.
         The contrast between the language deployed by restitutive justice activism on the
       one hand and the discourse of international law governing cultural property returns
       and of state-level negotiations, requires closer attention. However, rather than view
       this issue merely as a matter of different articulations or different political ‘genres’
       (of law and of art and activism), I take the perspective of power-relations and power-
       differentials, and approach restitutive justice discourse as ‘refractory speech acts’.
       The language practice at hand is a form of political action that contravenes and resists
       not simply the dominant representations of the history of colonial heritage acquisi-
       tions, translocations to and inclusions in ethnographic collections, but also the appa-
       ratus governing cultural restitutions and repatriations today (by ‘refractory’ I mean
       literally ‘unruly’ and ‘indocile’—refusing to be ruled or moulded by the dominant
       discourse). I focus on how these speech acts trouble and disarticulate the Eurocen-
       trism and anthropocentrism of the political ontology of objects rooted in the binary
       distinction between things and persons (what Roberto Esposito calls ‘the dispositif
       of a thing’), which has been operative in the traditional institutional and discursive
       framework of ethnographic museums. By refusing the person-thing divide restitu-
       tive struggles pursue emancipatory goals. They perform restitution; they reclaim and
       recapture these items, and actively change the semantics of repatriation, including
       rehoming and re-narrating them upon the objects’ release.
         This inquiry imbricates, on the one hand, with critical discussions and practices
       that have surfaced under the rubric of ‘decolonizing the museum’ (see e.g. Maranda,
       2021; Macdonald, 2022; Wali & Collins, 2023). It is a critical project that builds on
       the recognition of museums as, in the words of Anupama Arora (2021, p. 121), ‘insti-

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 3 of 20 30
                                                             
       tutions of power, sites of knowledge production and of memory and memorialization’
       implicated in the history of colonization, which ‘construct particular narratives of the
       past and present, cultural spaces that narrate the nation; and as “contact zones” or
       spaces of encounter and conflict’. While most of the contributions to museum decolo-
       nization have come from the fields of museum education and ethnography, as well
       as anthropology, aesthetics and heritage studies, my approach is political-theoretical
       and aims to develop a critique of the re-semanticization—what Janne Säynäjäkangas
       (2025) calls, in a different context, ‘radical simplification’—of non-western objects
       incorporated into museums as part of colonial cultural extractions that led to their
       translocation, inclusions in collections and conversion into ‘artifacts’ and ‘exhibits’,
       which is organized according to two dominant logics: of knowledge and visibility
       and of a non-identity of persons and things. The exhibit as a foundational epistemic
       category of the modern museum, and an outcome of processes of museumification
       (cf. Kim, 2024), reduces the complexity and heterogeneity of pre-colonial meanings
       of the objects at hand to inanimate and passive items that exist separately from their
       communal embeddedness and relationality. Enclosed within transparent plastic or
       glass display cases, the items, subjected to traditional European exhibition methods,
       were placed under a double organizing principle of haptic prohibition and public vis-
       ibility (they were ex-habere; offered to public view, literally ‘held out’ for everyone
       to view), (see Mugabowagahunde, 2016).                
         On the other hand, this inquiry also has points of connection with scholarship
       on Indigenous relational ontologies and biocentric normative systems that recognize
       other-than-human entities, including lakes and rivers, as ‘ancestral personhood’ and
       ‘environmental personhood’ (Clark et al., 2019; Moreton-Robinson, 2020; Pelizzon
       et al., 2021). Pelizzon et al. (2021) argue that the limitation of the concept of a person
       in western juridical tradition is due to its association with a character (persona) con-
       stituted by law through assignation of rights and duties. Their conceptualization of
       ‘ancestral personhood’, which the authors situate at the interstices of different legal
       orders, relies thus not on a formal recognition, but on embeddedness within a world
       and storytelling. In turn, Clark et al. (2019, p. 794) stress the relational dimension
       of Indigenous biocentric approaches, which move from representative speech and
       action (speaking about and on behalf of) to a second person address and receptivity
       (speaking and listening to), (for critical discusions see Reeves & Peters, 2021). The
       difference is that the standing of nature at hand involves jurisprudential develop-
       ments; in the case of recognition of cultural heritage items as beings—taken hostage,
       imprisoned, wounded, as well as addressees and returnees—the speech acts are pri-
       marily in the realm of politics and culture, not law (though see e.g. The Rutzolijiri-
       saxik Voluntary Guidelines for the Repatriation of Traditional Knowledge, which
       also include cultural and heritage knowledge).        
         I highlight the problematic encapsulation of objects in colonial collections within
       the category of inanimate and passive thinghood through the prism of Roberto Esposi-
       to’s concept of ‘the dispositif of a thing’. If it is indeed the case, as I propose, that
       restitutive speech acts of reclaiming and rehoming heritage trouble and fracture the
       binary opposition of persons and things, the argument is that they open possibilities
       for a richer and more political understanding of the postcolonial object movement.
       According to Esposito, the contemporary legacy of the Roman legal tradition is a cul-

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 4 of 20                          M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       tural understanding of things that are entirely separate from, and incompatible with,
       personhood and that become subordinate to persons’ mastery as possessions. One is a
       person, Esposito argues, insofar as one is not a thing, but can own things. These two
       disparate logics—of persons and of things—are not only theoretical figurations, but
       a foundation of a juridical frame that dominates, and is reproduced through, social
       practices, relations, and beliefs, as well as through structures of knowledge. I develop
       a reading of the thing/person in Esposito’s work that helps understand the political
       import of restitutive justice utterances and representations that subvert and contra-
       vene the dominant ‘dispositif of a thing’ because they regard heritage objects as con-
       cordant with personhood.                              
         The outline of Esposito’s ‘dispositif of a thing’ is followed by a discussion of
       Achille Mbembe’s critique of heritage returns that articulates a political conception
       of restitution as a decolonizing practice. While there are of course other notable the-
       oretical-postcolonial conceptualizations of restitution (see e.g. Bachir Diagne, 2023,
       2024), Mbembe’s contribution sheds light on restitutive speech and representations
       as counteraction and emphasizes that restitutions are a condition of possibility of
       political freedom, as well as cultural resurgence. When concatenated to the broader
       goals of decolonization, justice and social repair, restitution is an act, or a practice, of
       what Mbembe calls ‘disenclosure’ (2021). Restitution involves traversal of boundar-
       ies and liberation of objects, relationally embedded in the history and the present of
       the descendant communities of their custodians, from enclosures (institutional, legal,
       spatial and epistemic). Mbembe (2001) theorizes colonial power as a ‘divine com-
       mandment’ that both nullifies (a pre-colonial order) and creates (a new order of domi-
       nation). If one views the person/thing binary in the history of cultural extractivism
       and the translocation of objects together with Mbembe’s theory of colonial power,
       this casts into relief the nullifying and creative effects of the colonial ‘dispositif of a
       thing’ and its refusal as a practice of refractory politics.
         I deploy the vernacular of ‘restitutive speech acts’ to emphasize that when par-
       ticipants in postcolonial object movements challenge the disjointedness of things
       and persons through their language practice, they make political (and philosophi-
       cal) interventions. Echoing Judith Butler’s insights from Excitable Speech (1997),
       we can ask what kind of political action is at hand when such speech is uttered;
       under what circumstance can we view it as counteraction and resistance? Recogniz-
       ing the performative dimension of the language of restitutive struggles, as well as
       its diverse manifestations, is key here. By going beyond the formal framework of
       heritage returns and cultural exchanges, including refusal to adopt and repeat the
       core categories of its object epistemology (property, inanimacy, passivity), activists
       and artists enact and implement emancipatory political imaginaries. This aspect is
       conspicuous in, for instance, three recent cinematic productions addressing questions
       of post-colonial restitutions, which I use in the article as examples (and without being
       able to provide a detailed analysis): Mati Diop’s Dahomey (2024) that dramatizes the
       return of twenty-six royal treasures from the Kingdom of Dahomey to Benin; Suvi
       West’s Homecoming (2023) about the Finnish Sámi rehoming of annexed ancestral
       heritage; or Victoria Hunt’s film TAKE (2019) narrating the removal, and struggle for
       the return, of the ancestral Māori meetinghouse, Hinemihi. While a detailed analysis

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 5 of 20 30
                                                             
       of these works is outside of the scope of this article, I refer to them as examples of
       restitutive narratives and representations, which reclaim and rehome objects.
                                                             
       Roberto esposito’s thing/person dispositif            
                                                             
       Within his project on the critique of modern power, the Italian political philosopher
       Roberto Esposito outlines a principle of mutual opposition between ‘the world of
       things [and] the world of persons’ (2015, p. 3). The chasm separating human person-
       hood as a legal category from the formal and symbolic status of material objects is for
       Esposito not only a matter of structures of knowledge and representation, but also of
       morality, conscience and social recognition. The backdrop against which Esposito’s
       articulates this thing/person binary is his biopolitical critique of power defined as
       ‘a contest, or a conflict, between two subjective wills’ (2016, p. 27). Within this
       political-juridical framework, to exercise power means to subjugate the other to one’s
       will, which is modelled on the imaginary of proprietary relationships that human
       persons establish with the world of things, which they master, control and bend to
       their desires. Esposito identifies the axiomatic incompatibility and separateness of
       persons and things, deeply entrenched within the Eurocentric thinking about legal
       standing, rights, and moral agency, from the perspective of its profound crisis today.
       This crisis has become conspicuous in different domains of social life, including
       in digital technology, biotechnology, social robotics and human-machine relation-
       ships, which all complicate and destabilize the opposition between human persons
       and things as mutually exclusive categories (Dehnert & Gunkel, 2025). The alleg-
       edly impervious boundary between objects and humans has been shown to be highly
       porous in the case of, for instance, contemporary technologies enabling modification
       of bodies through their fusion with inorganic parts in tissue engineering industry
       and in regenerative medicine, or with regard to developments in robotics that place
       AI-enabled automatons in relationships of care, kinship and intimacy with humans
       (Vallor, 2011). Working within the political-theoretical register of human rights, Vat-
       ter and De Leeuw have argued that legal personhood based on the opposition of per-
       sons and things offers an inadequate protection of the ‘“precarious” reality of human
       embodied life’ (2023, p.106). A legal person is not synonymous with an embodied
       human, but, rather, is a legal construct and a governmental modality (a ‘power dis-
       positive’) that turns the body into a ‘“thing” under the ownership or dominium of the
       legal person’ (2023, p. 113).                         
         While in Esposito’s writings, and those of his interlocutors, the epistemic and
       ontological crisis of the thing/person distinction produces multifarious consequences
       (see Vermeulen, 2017; D’Angelo, 2022), its core implication for my argument is the
       reductive conception of material objects, which are depicted as passive, inanimate
       and subjugated to the will of persons, and equated with human possessions. The
       institution and discourse of the colonial museum becomes, from this perspective,
       not only a material and ideational product of coloniality and cultural appropriation
       (Maranda, 2021), by a site of the operations of power, knowledge and practices that
       correspond to ‘the dispositif of a thing’. This dispositif positions actors engaged in
       restitutive advocacy and activism in a specific relation to the law and the cultural her-

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 6 of 20                          M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       itage discourse, rendering some actions and utterances acceptable and legible, such
       as reclaiming heritage as stolen properly (cf. Nichols, 2018), and other actions and
       utterances, for instance, engaging in public ceremonies that mourn the objects’ loss or
       acknowledging the objects as agential embodiments of ancestral beings, or ascribing
       to them animistic power, as illegible according to the dominant logic. While Esposito
       does not mention ethnographic museums or public heritage laws in his discussion of
       the legal and political apparatus of the person/thing distinction, the ‘dispositif of a
       thing’ is operative in the process of de-semanticization of the colonial heritage into
       the category of museal exhibits and their voiding of (pre-colonial) meanings and rela-
       tional significance. Esposito’s critique imbricates with postcolonial perspectives of
       restitution that articulate non-anthropocentric conceptions of objecthood as intimated
       by the claim in The Third Person that ‘the person is not to be conceived of as the only
       form within which life is destined to flow’ (2011, p. 140).
         According to Esposito, the conceptual sedimentation of persons and things as
       disjoint sets in European law and philosophy has its roots in Gaius’ Institutes that
       defined legal subjectivity negatively as ‘not a thing’. In effect, (some) humans have
       gained the status of persons (in the course of their lives) insofar as they are owners
       and proprietors of things (patria). Things as legal constructs (res) are thus of para-
       mount social importance because they stabilize and categorize relationships between
       persons (Esposito, 2016, p. 69). Persons and things are, at the same time, ‘the oppo-
       site and the horizon of the other’ (Esposito 2012b, p. 10). Law’s division into three
       schemes in Institutes—the family law of persons (personae), laws pertaining to mate-
       rial things (res), and procedural law dealing with human actions (actiones)—puts
       into operation a dichotomous and exclusionary formula that makes ‘thing [into] a
       non-person and person [into] a non-thing’ (Esposito, 2015, p. 17). Things become
       synonymous with inanimate possessions, artifacts and household ‘goods’; the thing-
       person relation is that of ‘instrumental domination’ (2015, p. 16). Thus, within the
       framework of Roman law, the primary characteristic of things concerns their social
       function and instrumental value, which, importantly, is filtered through the relations
       of ownership and property. Even when the things ‘do not belong to anyone’, Esposito
       writes (2016, p. 70), ‘in principle they … never evade the regime of at least potential
       appropriability’.                                     
         The crux of Esposito’s critique is that the person/thing binary produces dual politi-
       cal effects that have ricocheted in western politics and culture until today: the ‘de-
       personalization of persons’ and the ‘de-realization of things’ (2015, pp. 4–8). On
       the one hand, the person/thing chasm produces an effect whereby (some) people are
       barred from personhood (or slide out of it or fail to attain it); one the other hand, it
       also transforms objects into passive and inanimate instruments of the human will.
       Persons and things ‘face each other in a relationship of mutual interchangeability: to
       be a subject, modern man must make the object dependent on his own production’—
       as well as representation and language—while at the same time ‘the object cannot
       exist outside of the ideational power of the subject’ (Esposito, 2015, p. 63). First, the
       de-personalization, or reification, of persons, means the exclusion or erasure of some
       humans from the category of personhood as ‘the invisible bond that unites [persons
       and things] turns some type of men […] into some kind of things who, like things,
       are made absolutely available to people’ (2016, p. 28). In Roman law, the category

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 7 of 20 30
                                                             
       of personhood was not encompassing of all people, but, in fact, differential and inter-
       nally stratified, depending on their status as propriators; personhood was attained by
       some, to ‘varying degrees’, and at only at certain life moments. For Esposito, de-
       personalization rests on a set of juridical and political meachnisms effectuating the
       removing of groups of people, or individuals, from the community of persons and
       forcing them into the category of things (importantly, Mussawir and Parsley provide
       a more nuanced reading of the Roman law of persons arguing that, rather than a signi-
       fier of social stratification and exclusion or of the abstraction of formal legal catego-
       ries, it needs to be viewed through the lens of law as a ‘technique’ or ‘art’ involved in
       fictionalizing and creatively ‘fashioning’ the legal subject without much concern for
       its alignment with ‘an order of natural reality’, see 2017, p. 50).
         The breadth of Esposito’s critical gesture is notable, if not all together uncontro-
       versial: while the conception of ‘de-personalization of persons’ builds on the histori-
       cally specific Marxian and postcolonial studies insights that capitalist and colonial
       socio-economic relations determine whether people are recognized as human per-
       sons—in order to attain personhood, they needs to own ‘things’ (including land,
       which is thereby reduced to an appropriable object)—as well as makes a more gen-
       eral proposition that ‘a thing’ is a mobile and sliding sign that can be carried over
       or transposed onto people. Thus, de-personalization creates ‘men-things’ and is the
       reverse side of the history of liberal progress and gradual attainment of rights as a
       subterrenian history of the production of ‘non-persons, almost-persons, temporary
       persons [and] anti-persons’ (Esposito, 2016, p. 29; 2015, p. 30). Esposito’s para-
       digmatic example of these differential and chiasmic operations of personhood is the
       legal status of insolvent debtors and of slaves in ancient Rome, which, as Esposito
       puts it, ‘hovered between the regimes of persons and things’ (2015, p. 15; see also,
       2012b, pp. 75–80). Thus, rather than ‘being the absolute opposite of the person, the
       thing appears here as the central mechanism inside the category of a person—that
       which, only by having been possessed or consumed, makes the person truly such
       as the subject of this possession’ (2015, p. 48). As Vatter and de Leeuw argue ref-
       erencing Orlando Patterson’s notion of slavery as ‘social death’ (2019, p. 7), what
       Esposito outlines here is a relationship of radical exclusion from personhood and
       from ‘human community’ that renders the ‘non-persons’ appropriable. In The Third
       Person Esposito gives another example of de-personalization analyzing the language
       used by Nazi propaganda to de-humanize groups considered to be the enemies of
       the nation. He emphasizes the normalization of object-centered descriptives in rela-
       tion to those groups and to genocidal violence as ‘pieces (Stücke), replacement parts
       (Häftlinge), human material (Menschenmaterial), to be loaned (ausleihen), unloaded
       (abladen), shipped (verschiffen), and eventually, of course, destroyed’ (2012b, p. 61).
       These examples cast into relief personhood not as an intrinsic category of any beings
       of entities, but as a biopolitical operation (see Reeves & Peters, 2021).
         The other (reverse) effect of the person/thing dispositif is the ‘dematerialization’
       or ‘derealization’ of things, which Esposito conceptualizes through a combined read-
       ing of Heidegger and Marx. The process of derealization implies an epistemic reduc-
       tion of objects ‘stripping away [their] fleshy part’ and ‘abstracting their material
       content’, making them lose ‘their own [living] substance’ (2016, p. 8; 2015, p. 6). In
       the Marxian perspective, ‘things’ are productive outputs (commodities) whose value

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 8 of 20                          M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       depends on their use or the worth they hold in market exchanges (Halewood, 2014;
       Rappaport,2017). Following Martin Heidegger, Esposito also problematizes the defi-
       nition of things as that which is at human disposal—things are ‘at our disposition’ or
       ‘standing in reserve’; they are in principle always ‘reproducible and replaceable’ with
       ‘something equivalent’ within a certain order (2016, p. 87). The modern meaning of
       the very ‘dispose’ in English (from ca. 1620 s) is illustrative of this relationship as it
       signifies power that legal persons hold to make use of the things they own, to control
       them or do away with. Here Esposito’s work can be productively viewed in con-
       junction with the field of ‘thing theory’, whose core contributors have also stressed
       the simplification and impoverishment of our cultural discourse of objects (see e.g.
       Brown, 2001; Bryant, 2011). According to these critics, who are less concerned than
       Esposito in identifying Roman and Greek philosophic ‘survivals’ in our contempo-
       rary thinking about objects, and more in assessing the impact of western modernity
       and modern capitalism, with the emergence of mass production economies the types
       of things we recognize as singular and unique (such as artworks or family mementos)
       have radically diminished. In contrast, the preponderance of the economic vernacular
       in the public discussions of things—as resources, tools of production, outputs, com-
       modities, disposables and waste—is illustrative of the difficulties faced by restitutive
       actors deploying language of worth and importance that is incompatible with, and
       transcends, considerations of market value or private and public utility. Their differ-
       ences notwithstanding, Esposito and the ‘thing theory’ authors such as Bill Brown
       identify the cultural impact of the ‘derealization’ of objects as not only their fun-
       damental reproducibility and replaceability, but their voiding of an affective force,
       potency, and agential propensity (cf. Esposito, 2016, pp. 33–34).
       The colonial thing dispositif                         
       Contributors to the postcolonial restitution debates insist on the recognition of the
       violent origins of colonial collections, not only in the cases of plunder or booty, but
       when heritage acquisitions took the form of economic transactions or (supposedly)
       gifts and donations (see e.g. Losson, 2022 who complicates the notion of ‘gifted
       object’ with reference to Aztec emperor Montezuma’s featherhead in the holdings
       of the World Museum Vienna). They argue that focusing disputes only on objects
       acquisitioned through acts prohibited by customary international humanitarian law,
       such as pillage and taking of ‘war trophies’ during military colonial expeditions (see
       e.g. LeGall & Machona, 2022), would mean adopting the optic of an overly nar-
       row and decontextualized conception of violence as a use of physical force. In this
       context, Mbembe (2018a) makes the point that even though relying on of interna-
       tional law by restitutive justice struggles might be necessary, the current framework
       of legal rights and obligations offers little basis for redress of past dispossessions
       (with the exception of spoils of war—and even in this case only if they occurred
       after the 1907 Hague Convention, while placing the burden of proof on the harmed
       subject, see Arndt, 2011). One of the effects of cultural extractivism is the ‘cesura
       [that] has opened between the law of property and the act of creation’ whereby ances-
       tral belonging does not connote rights to own, ‘to use, to derive profit from, [or] to
       dispose of’. For that reason, Mbembe argues (2018a), decolonial politics of restitu-
                                                             

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 9 of 20 30
                                                             
       tion must ‘[untie] law from obligations of justice’. The Māori artist Victoria Hunt
       exemplifies poignantly this in her film TAKE: while the ‘purchase’ of the communal
       meeting house Hinemihi by William Hillier resulted in her translocation and legal
       ownership by the British National Trust, Hunt insists that this never interrupted the
       community’s spiritual ownership of Hinemihi, and their relationship based on care,
       knowledge and custodianship.                          
         Sharing the skepticism about law as a guarantor of justice and redress, other aca-
       demic authors and public intellectuals, including Lotte Arndt, Souleymane Bachir
       Diagne, Paul Basu, El Hadji Malick Ndiaye, Njoki Ngumi, Simon Njami, Felwine
       Sarr (and others), have drawn on systemic, economic, cultural and epistemic con-
       ceptions of violence to formulate deeply contextualized critiques of cultural extrac-
       tivism, object translocation, and presentational aesthetics traditionally deployed by
       ethnographic museums. Among them, Jim Chuchu and Njoki Ngumi contribute a key
       observation that it is important to not frame the question of violent acquisitions as an
       event that belongs squarely to the past, but to take the current museal, scholarly and
       legal governance of the heritage items as a sign of the continuity of colonial relations.
       What Chuchu and Ngumi mean by coloniality in this case is a mode of international
       governance based on commandments and prohibitions that severely restricts the
       agency and capacity of colonized groups and societies to exercise self-determination
       with respect to their own heritage, making them dependent on ‘benevolent acts’ of
       Western governments and institutions. These colonial governmentalities manifest
       through, for instance, deaccession rules and regulations, as well as through ‘innumer-
       able technicalities, explanations, policies, and laws that are firmly in place to prevent
       the return of objects’ (Chuchu & Ngumi, 2023).        
         Echoing these critical sentiments, Mbembe (2019d) dubs western ethnographic
       museums ‘crime scenes’ and ‘spaces of captivity’ whose continuous existence proves
       that colonialism ‘is not something we can relegate to the distant past’, and which
       rely on and invigorate the political apparatus controlling the movement of the object
       and isolating and immobilizing them (physically and discursively), while generating
       economic and symbolic profits (Arndt, 2011). Mbembe’s point is that even in the
       case of nominally successful postcolonial heritage returns, insofar as they follow the
       logic of a gift, rather than are a response to a claim-making (Azoulay, 2015, 2019),
       they are vulnerable to become instruments for the displays and cementation of colo-
       nial power. In this regard, Mbembe’s (and others’) decolonial critique of restitution
       draws out in my view the contemporary relevance of Frederick Douglass important
       claim from 1857 that ‘[p]ower concedes nothing without a demand’, as they reframe
       restitution away from the imaginary of charitable endowments or tokens of generos-
       ity and recognition of the former imperial states and institutions and towards a far
       more radical notion of restitution through political struggle, resistance, reclaiming
       and reappropriation. Rather than seeking recognition, they demand an acknowledg-
       ment (cf. Markell, 2003), which is a central point in Mbembe’s intervention when
       he narrates restitution as an opportunity to develop ‘a capacity for truth’, laying out
       foundation for ‘a new relation’ (2018a; cf. Sarr & Savoy, 2018).
         Returning to Esposito’s ‘person/thing dispositif’, his account the Roman juridi-
       cal notion of property rested on the imagery of an action of ‘prior appropriation’—
       the taking of spoils and (or) in the speech act declaring and claiming res nullius

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 10 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       (that thing that belongs to no one belongs to me). He writes that in its ‘primordial
       form’ property was ‘neither transmitted nor inherited [but] seized. … Property had
       nothing behind it, except the act that made it so’ (2016, p. 21). Thus, for a thing to
       ‘become unequivocally one’s own, it had to have been torn from nature or from other
       people. That which is your own … is what you take with your hand, manu captum
       […]’ (2016, p. 22), (the acquisition of the Dahomey treasure depicted by Mati Diop’s
       recent film, exemplifies such violent acquisition). While Esposito makes here a point
       about the absence of an ‘insurmountable boundary between law and violence’ in the
       ancient juridical genesis of property and acquisitions (and about Roman law’s pat-
       rimonialistic character), Mbembe (2018a) formulates a strikingly similar postulate
       about the violent beginnings of Western ethnographic collections as ‘acts of confisca-
       tion’, including cases that occurred through the ‘fictions [of] voluntary transactions
       between economic and political equals’ and through free market exchanges ‘where
       the value of the object was determined by [means of an] objective calculus’. The
       traditional presentational aesthetics in ethnographic museums de-realize the objects
       by alienating them from their violent history, perpetuating the imaginary of an object
       that (to borrow Esposito’s felicitous phrase) ‘spontaneously offers itself to a grasp’
       and ‘falls into one’s hand’. The discourse of ‘universal human heritage’ deployed
       by so-called encyclopedic museums to prevent and oppose restitutions (see Losson,
       2022) is, from this perspective, a form of things’ de-realization.
         Extraction and translocation of cultural heritage exemplify the material and sym-
       bolic dynamics of ‘thing derealization’. Among others, Sebastian De Line (2018) has
       written about the colonial ‘translation of beings into objects’ through insertion into
       legal, institutional, and discursive frameworks of ethnographic and natural history
       museums, art galleries, or private collections in the west. He argues that these items
       were wrenched from their communities and from the ‘original contextual meanings
       [of] animate beingness’, which were very different from the dichotomous person/
       thing paradigm and were derived instead from worldviews in which humans and
       other-than-human beings were complementary, relational, and co-constitutive. From
       this perspective, dispossession means mutually imbricating processes of physical,
       discursive and symbolic extraction (of items) from whole systems of knowledge, use,
       and belonging that recognized them beings and presences with whom humans and
       more-than-humans shared the world (De Line, 2018). In turn, Mbeme (2021) consid-
       ers the ‘derealization’ of things’ through the annexed items’ re-semanticization and
       de-vitalization as a key political effect of extraction and dispossession. Historically,
       this has occurred through three different modalities of the non-European objects’
       reception in Europe, which he articulated through the optical metaphors of the mis-
       sionary gaze, the racializing gaze, and the ethnographic gaze, which in turn have
       produced three kinds of ‘derealized things’—the idol, the fetish, and the artifact.
       The missionary gaze viewed the objects as manifestations of the demonic and an
       expression of ‘ancient forms of knowledge’, which needed to be destroyed by way of
       ‘extirpating idolatry’. The racializing gaze was equally engaged in a construction of
       difference, but it developed historically in connection to biological determinist race
       ideologies of the 19th century (it resulted in the construction of a fetish, imbuing
       the objects with meanings of ‘excessive crudeness’, ‘sensual coarseness’ and ‘erotic
       stain’). The 20th century ethnographic gaze grounded the object within their anthro-

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 11 of 20 30
                                                             
       pological context by drawing on epistemic categories from European knowledge
       traditions, including those of religious art. Accordingly, what was displaced or nul-
       lified by these semantic and discursive constructions of colonized people’s heritage
       as a ‘thing’ was their embeddedness within heterogeneous systems of meaning and
       belonging, and their recognition as potent and powerful (to cite Esposito again, their
       irreducibility to ‘servile tools’ of human persons).  
         In this context, Lotte Arndt’s contribution to the decolonial restitution criticism is
       particularly noteworthy because she points directly to thing-centric dimension in the
       violence of cultural extractivism. Arndt’s account of cultural colonial extractivism
       recognizes the heritage items themselves as targets and victims of injurious actions,
       including their despoilment, isolation, and modification: as Arndt argues, in addition
       to the ‘violence of theft, confiscation [etc.], we must include violence done to the
       object itself, which is often stripped of its accoutrements, varnished or even remod-
       eled’ (2011, p. 66; see also Sarr & Savoy, 2018, p. 30). The colonial modality of
       what Esposito theorizes as things’ de-realization is thus their ‘diasporization’, mean-
       ing not only circulation and dispersal but also a kind of alienation (cf. Peffer, 2005;
       Basu, 2017). The importance of Arndt’s postulate is that, drawing on the insights of
       John Peffer, she articulates the process of semantic reformulation accompanying the
       objects’ translocation into museal institutions as violence inflicted on them (which, of
       course, is inseparable from the violence perpetrated against their originating commu-
       nities). A poignant example of the violence of the colonial ‘thing dispositif’ is found
       in Hunt’s film TAKE (2019). Hunt narrates Hinemihi extraction as a violent ‘sever-
       ing of relations’ that abruptly interrupts the ‘communal, spiritual, and mnemonic co-
       belonging of Hinemihi and her people’ to each other (Zolkos, 2025) and as a series
       of brutal incisions into her body—in effect of the translocation, Hinemihi’s elements
       were removed, gifted to other collectors, and some went missing. Hunt’s articulation
       of embodiment imbricates closely with Prażmowska-Marcinowska’s point (2022, p.
       137) that for numerous participants in restitutive justice struggles disputed entities
       are irreducible to ‘cultural property’, but, rather, are ““living” objects that embody
       … moral values [and] traditions’.                     
         Finally, the aptness of Esposito’s concept of the thing/person binary for critical res-
       titution debate is that many its contributors also take seriously the claim that, within
       the dominant (colonial) power apparatus, ‘things’ and ‘persons’ are inseparable, but,
       rather, ‘form part of the same horizon’ (Esposito, 2015, p. 2). Mbembe takes the
       antithetical distinction between thinghood and ‘humanhood’ (rather between thing-
       hood than personhood) as a cornerstone of emancipatory struggles, including those
       centered around historical justice and heritage repatriations (2018b; see also 2021;
       2024). For him, European states’ recalcitrant refusals to restitute cultural heritage
       items to former colonies and the current securitization of Europe’s borders through
       technologies of deportation and immobilization of racialized and ‘undesirable’ peo-
       ple (frequently residents of the same places where the artworks come from) defines
       that shared horizon (2019d; on the paradigms of mobility and border-technology, see
       Shachar, 2020). For both the objects and the people, the border is sealed and impass-
       able, though while the former are enclosed within, the latter are enclosed without
       (if the power orders the border to open, it is only to deport the people outside and to
       allow more objects inside). The border security technologies aimed at keeping human

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 12 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       bodies out and the deaccession prohibitions aimed at keeping things in are both, for
       Mbembe,                                               
         symptoms of coloniality.                            
         The dual effect of racial capitalism is, on the one hand, turning the human ‘into
       an object’ (that can be commodified, and from whom optimal labor power can be
       extracted) and, on the other thing, the ‘compulsion to put things into order’, that
       is to ‘categorize, separate, measure, name and classify’ them as a ‘precondition to
       extract their inner value’ (Mbembe 2018b). Mbembe pursues further the connection
       between bodies kept out and things kept in along the lines of Esposito’s shared nexus
       of ‘de-personalization of persons’ and ‘de-realization of things’, when he asks, rather
       provocatively, whether, ‘after the objects were in the European museums for so long’,
       Europe has learnt the most valuable lesson that they have offered—‘how to come to
       terms with those who come from outside it’ (2018a; 2019a).1
         Blurring the distinction between deportations of persons and restitution of object
       (once they have become de-valued, thus equating restitutions and expulsions),
       Mbembe calls the psycho-political undercurrent of both the ‘genocidal unconscious’
       (2018b). Reminiscent of Hannah Arendt’s understanding of Adolf Eichmann’s crime
       but developed directly through Mbembe’s critical reading of Alexis de Tocqueville’s
       advocacy for African Americans’ ‘self-repatriation’ as a kind of democratic necessity,
       the notion of the ‘genocidal unconscious’ channels a desire to get rid of those whom
       the subject does not want to (‘cannot’) share the world with. Mbembe thus radicalizes
       restitution as not only a political struggle, but also an ethical demand, by asserting
       that it must not come from devaluation and debasement of, or desire to expel and be
       rid of, the Other, but bring about an actual experience of loss, and as such constitute
       a counter-gesture to the ‘genocidal unconscious’—to express and contribut to what
       Mbembe calls a ‘planetary consciousness’ (2019e), affirming the world ‘as belonging
       to all of us who inhabit it’ (2019d). Rather than follow the logic of partition and isola-
       tion, reframed restitutions can embody the logic of a connection and support shared
       remembrance (2018a).                                  
       Colonial power as a commandment and irreverent speech acts
       Building on the discussion of Esposito’s account of power modelled on the legal
       opposition between personhood and thinghood, and of the colonial ‘thing dispositif’
       operative in cultural extractivism and museumification of ancestral heritage items
       as art objects and ethnographic exhibits (De Line, 2018; Mbembe, 2021), I return
       now to the question of ‘refractory speech acts’ deployed by contributors to restitutive
       justice struggles. Can we understand their utterances and representations as practices
       of counter-power? How do these acts of defiance against the dominant dispositif
       disarticulate and create ‘cracks’ in the state-centric, juridical-museological discourse
       governing restitutions today?                         
       1 Suvi West’s Máhccan (Homecoming) depicting the repatriation of the Finnish Sámi ancestral heritage,
       gives a powerful example of this dual dispositif of ‘de-personalization of persons’ and ‘de-realization of
       things’: the film juxtaposes, on the one hand, the history of cultural extractivism that alienated ceremonial
       items from their assemblages of human relationships, knowledges, skills and rituals, with exoticization of
       the Sámi and other Indigenous peoples within ‘ethnological expositions’ (or ‘human zoos).
                                                             

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 13 of 20 30
                                                             
         By deploying the speech act theory, I have aimed to emphasize the performative
       dimension of restitutive language, which includes reclamations, retrievals and dis-
       enclosures of the political ontology of the objects from the category of thinghood.
       In this context, Achille Mbembe’s political theological critique of colonial power
       offers a (potentially) productive avenue for understanding restitutive language acts
       as irreverent in relation to the power’s commandment. Specifically, the speakers’
       irreverence manifests as ‘calling out’ the states and institutions that enjoy the status
       of ‘legal owners’ of objects with colonial provenance (this is well illustrated by the
       restitution debate in Diop’s Dahomey where some of the speakers describe the French
       Senate’s approval of repatriation as ‘an insult’, because of the meagre number of
       actually restituted objects, and de-mask France’s purported humanitarian motivations
       as thinly veiled self-interest). By declaring alliegance to other social norms and other
       value systems and ethical considerations, the utterers manifest as irreverent in that
       they literally refuse to ‘stand in awe, fear, respect’ (vereri) in relation to the institu-
       tions that currently hold the items and that seek to determine restitutive terms and
       semantics, as well as in relation to colonial and international humanitarian laws that
       have reduced belonging and human and more-than-human relationality to ownership
       and proprety. By theorizing colonial power as a ‘command’ and a ‘commandment’,
       Mbembe frames the material and discursive processes underwriting cultural extrac-
       tivism as a key effect of coloniality, linked to a symbolic economy of the ‘political-
       theological transfers of monotheistic principles’ (Collison, 2022).
         In On the Postcolony (2001) Mbembe conceptualizes the performative dimen-
       sion of a command against his broader political-theological postulate that sovereign
       power in the colony is modelled on an Abrahamic divine commandment. Thus, the
       term ‘commandment’ means for Mbembe not merely a behest, order, or mandate;
       rather, referencing the Judeo-Christian tradition and the decalogue, he defines com-
       mandment as foundational inauguration of a framework for social life. Its performa-
       tive dimension means that the commandment produces, or calls into being, what it
       describes (cf. Collison, 2024). The distinctive feature of the commandment is that it
       introduces a radical discontinuity of the political ‘now’ and a prior order, thus bifur-
       cating the temporality into the colony into a ‘before’ and ‘after’. Here the performa-
       tive dimension of the commandment and the requisitionary dimension of the colony
       (the colonizer’s authorized access to bodies, objects, resources and knowledges)
       closely overlap. Combining law and lawlessness (cf. Kohn & McBride, 2011, p. 91)
       power as a commandment ‘moves’ alongside two vectors: it both seeks to produce (a
       new order) and to destroy or render void (a prior order). It concurrently ‘brings new
       entities into being’ and revokes ‘entities that already existed’; it ‘lets a thing be or lets
       it not be’ (Mbembe, 2001):                            
         [To] colonize is to put to work the two-faceted movement of destroying and creat-
       ing, creating by destroying, creating destruction and destroying the creation, creating
       to create, and destroying to destroy. To this extent, to colonize is, par excellence, a
       gratuitous act. To colonize is also to deploy a subjectivity freed of any limit, a subjec-
       tivity seeing itself as absolute but which, to experience that absolute, must constantly
       reveal it to itself by creating, destroying, and desiring the thing and the animal that it
       has previously summoned into existence. From the standpoint of the conqueror, the

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 14 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       colony is a world of limitless subjectivity. In this, the act of colonizing resembles a
       miracle (Mbembe, 2001, p. 189).                       
         In her discussion of Mbembe’s political theology, Benedetta Lanfranchi (2019)
       has linked the destructive vector of colonial power to ‘epistemic closure’, which
       renders other forms of knowledge and historical experiences subordinate to its own
       position of ‘universal reason’. The space of the museum and the discourse of eth-
       nographic collections illustrate this dynamic of Mbembe’s ‘theologically inflected’
       (Ringer, 2021) notion of colonial power. Situating the ‘thing dispositif’ as an oper-
       ation of a commandment casts into relief the bi-vectoral operation of power that
       appropriates and extracts by simultaneously nullifying these items’ prior relations
       of belonging and meaning-making within their origin communities and creating a
       new set of signs, identities and significations. The colonial ‘derealization of things’
       proceeds through the dual dynamic of construction of artifacts or exhibits through
       museumification and devaluation and elimination of pre-colonial systems of knowl-
       edge and thought that recognized these items as ‘depositories of vital force, of differ-
       ent energies, destructive [or] nurturing the reserves of life and potentiality’ (Mbembe
       2019a), and as ‘mediators of correspondence, of metaphors and passages within an
       ecosystem characterized by fluidity and circularity’ (Sarr & Savoy, 2018, p. 34). The
       signifier ‘native’, applied either to people or to objects, is a ‘creation and object of
       the colonizer’s imagination’ and ‘the supreme example of the power of his/her arbi-
       trariness’, which is in turn a condition of possibility of the colonizer’s emergence as
       a sovereign subject as they are ‘only conscious of self in the enjoyment of the thing
       that he or she produces and possesses’ (Mbembe, 2001, pp. 188–189).
         Taking Mbembe’s notion of power as a commandment as a lens through which
       to view cultural extractivism highlights the need to attend to the two parallel trajec-
       tories of, on the one hand, acts of physical confiscation and translocation that have
       exerts detrimental systemic effects and, on the other hand, the discursive transduction
       of heritage items’ ontologies into inanimate and appropriable servile things. From
       this perspective ‘reframing restitution’ means recognizing the political significance
       of restitutive justice language beyond the goals of physical returns and transfer of
       legal ownership (important as they are); in addition, at hand are performative actions
       of reclaiming, receiving, rehoming and retrieving objects from their institutional and
       discursive colonial enclosures. ‘Reframing restitution’ means recognizing its counter-
       political potential, to which my reading of Mbembe adds that these are irreverent acts.
       While Esposito’s critique of ‘de-realization of things’ and Mbembe’s account of colo-
       nial power might not fully align (see McMahon, 2017), reading them together casts
       into relief restitutive justice speech actions as refusals to obey a power command-
       ment and as an irreverent response to its self-affirmations and self-promulgations.
         Another expression of such irreverent critique is the refusal to adopt the western
       discourse on (successful) restitutions and repatriations, which, when they happen, are
       often presented as a kind of closure to colonial past in which the very event of return
       and reacquisition is assumed to, in and of itself, repair the effects of the injurious
       actions and, to use a phrase from Freudian psychoanalysis, ‘make-unhappen’ the past
       (Zolkos, 2020). Mbembe (2018a, 2019a) disrupts and troubles that restitutive fantasy
       when he insists that the return of the objects from the colonial museums and their
       reintegration within the origin communities is necessarily linked to the experience

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 15 of 20 30
                                                             
       of facing and grappling with loss and perhaps even with irreparability. He reminds
       his European audiences and readers of the fact that has been evident to the colonized
       groups but that has been historically unacknowledged by the museums holding the
       collections, as well as obfuscated and invisibilized in their presentational aesthetics
       (cf. Akpang, 2024), namely that the loss of heritage did not simply mean expropria-
       tion of valuable cultural assets or evacuation of material objects, but depletion of cre-
       ative energies and dispossessions of communities, societies, and cultures, of which
       these items were an inseparable part. Subject to extraction are thus the ‘reservoirs of
       creativity’ and ‘force[s] of generability’ that have been part of these objects’ assem-
       blage (Sarr, 2019). Here the defiance of the ‘thing dispositif’ lies in the postulate that
       these objects are irreducible to (re)appropriable items with a calculable value, and
       that in order to understand the loss incurred through extractivism, it is necessary to
       consider them through the lens of their human and more-than-human relations and
       assemblages. Sarr adopts a generational perspective to argue that these pernicious
       effects are just as pronounced today as they were when the extractions occurred, and
       that hence even ‘historical’ colonial dispossessions should not be narrated in the past
       tense; he refers to the contemporary generations of young people in the colonized
       societies as ‘inheritors of history that has been transmitted [to them] via fragments’.
       Mbembe coins the expression ‘aporia of restitution’ to articulate his normative politi-
       cal position on postcolonial restitutions that, even (or, perhaps, especially) when the
       goals of repatriation struggles are accomplished and the ceremonial objects return to
       their custodian societies, the questions of loss and irreparability are thrown into relief
       and brought to the fore for these groups and societies as a matter of shared concern
       and action. The aporia of restitution means that the return of the objects is inseparable
       from the collective reflection about that which is beyond the possibility to restore and
       recover.                                              
         For the western museums to agree to repatriation requests and to return (parts
       of) their collections without probing and acknowledging the destructiveness and
       violence of these ‘acquisitions’, means not simply that these restitutive gestures are
       ‘incomplete’; it is, Mbembe argues, a political and ethical failure that divests restitu-
       tions of their potential as decolonizing events and as initiations of what he calls ‘a
       new relation’. But what is just as important is that such an acknowledgment would
       puncture colonial mastery fantasy; a fantasy underwriting restitutions as ‘benevolent
       acts’ through which the western ‘do-gooders’ can exercise power to undo and repair
       harms of colonialism. The irreverence of the speech acts means refusing to ‘say thank
       you’, i.e. to accept the operative logic of restitution as a gift and respond to acts of
       return with gratitude. It also means troubling the assumption that it is in capacity of
       colonial institutions that undertake the returns to bring about the reparative effects of
       restitution. Rather, reparative agency lies with the receiving groups and communities.
         Finally, Mbembe returns to the question of loss when he proposes that, rather
       than a charitable and benevolent gestured modelled on a gift-logic, restitution should
       coincide with an experience of loss for the societies from where these objects depart
       (2018a; 2018b). If restitution is to realize its radical political potential as an ‘act of
       repairing the world’, it cannot mean simply be a return of that which one no longer
       wants or desires, but, rather, a divestiture and relinquishment of something precious,
       singular and irreplaceable (a ‘de-realized thing’). Such restitution invokes the expe-

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 16 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
                                                             
       rience of forfeiture and loss on the part of the societies that return, which, again,
       interrupts and punctures the political fantasy of human-centric and colonial mas-
       tery expressed through a grammatical shift from an active proprietary subject who
       undertakes the returns to a position that Levinasian philosophical ethics describes as
       ‘passivity’—restitution is something that the colonial subject undergoes; a process
       through which they are undone. For Mbembe this undergoing of a loss is a condition
       of possibility of transformative political and social effects of restitution, both with
       regard to shared collective memory and what he calls a ‘capacity for truth’.
         In her 2023 Máhccan (Homecoming), Finnish Sámi director West provides a poi-
       gnant illustration of such reparative agency on the part of those groups and societies
       that receive the objects back from their previous colonial holdings. Documenting
       the complex psycho-social dynamics of repatriation, West not only frames restitu-
       tion as a homecoming but casts into relief the ambivalence of heritage reception that
       prevents the viewers of her film to apply the frame of a ‘success story’. As such,
       her film provides a holding space for a plurality of gestures, responses and feelings,
       where the communal celebrations, joy and pride at the accomplishment of the Finnish
       Sámi peoples’ struggles for the retrieval of their heritage do not diminish the critical
       or painful aspects of that experience, including the dismay and sadness at how many
       Sámi objects continute to remain outside of their control and custodianship. Rather
       than approach restitution from the perspective of epistemic certainty and ‘objective
       knowledge’, West construes her restitutive narrative by voicing questions and doubts,
       including ancestral invocations, and by allowing herself to not know in advance,
       while capturing on camera moments of her own vulnerability, be it in museal spaces,
       or when encountering ancestoral presences through objects, or when confronted with
       a violent interpellation of an expert that pressures her ‘to look’ at something West
       considers too private and intimate to inspect. West grounds the film in a significant
       political gesture of explicitly renouncing the power that she might hold as a director
       and an author of the homecoming story, stating in the film that she ‘does not control
       [it]’, but that it is the ‘narratives, people and objects [that] lead [her] to places’. West
       thus narrates her positionality and her own presence within the restitutive process,
       developing a remarkably honest and tender account of the political, economic, and
       emotional difficulties involved in heritage reception, including working thourgh the
       historical trauma of violence and oppression that these objects can be a reminder
       of. Particularly poignant in this context is the film’s narrative of ceremonial drums,
       which remain largely unrepatriated, and which are carriers of painful memory of
       violence against Sámi communities and culture.        
         By shifting accents of cultural representations of restitution from repatriation as
       ‘giving back’ to repatriation as ‘receiving back’, Homecoming captures its relational,
       social and communicative dimensions and depicts community and its members in
       the moment of coming together to negotiate shared meanings and the memories
       they hold in common, as well as to develop socio-cultural practices of receptivity.
       In West’s representation, the ambivalence connects affects with political resonance
       of restitution that gives a complex and nuanced account of what it means to receive
       heritage back (i.e. to become receptive) and to what it means to exercise reparative
       agency in the world.                                  

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 17 of 20 30
       Conclusions                                           
                                                             
       This article has examined the discourse surrounding restitution of heritage items from
       Western ethnographic museums to descendant communities of these items’ makers,
       care-takers and custodians. Taking a starting point in the discrepancy between the
       language of international law on cultural property and speech acts deployed by par-
       ticipants in the restitutive justice movements, who frequently reference and address
       the objects as un-appropriable, potent and relational beings, I have drawn on the
       political philosophy of Roberto Esposito and of Achille Mbembe to reframe restitu-
       tion—away from the dominance of legalistic and state-centric frameworks that man-
       age, control and restrict the processes of ‘giving back’ and towards a more radical
       notion of restitution as a politics of reclaiming, rehoming of and receptivity towards
       the objects. With regards to Esposito, I have drawn on his conceptualization of mod-
       ern power dynamics that manifest through the ‘dispositif of a thing’ in a western
       legal tradition that brings about the political effects of derealization and alienation
       of objects, including, in the colonial contexts of cultural extractivism, through
       translocation, disaporization and museumification of Indigenous peoples’ heritage.
       Reading Esposito together with political-theological perspective of Achille Mbembe
       who critiques colonial power as ‘commandment’, highlights refractory and irrever-
       ent performativity of the restitutive speech acts that reclaim and rehome heritage.
       For restitutive justice struggles to defy the ‘thing dispositif’ means to resist both the
       destructive and creative dimensions of that power that Mbembe outlines—and to
       respond with irreverence to the commandment. Rather than equating restitutions with
       transfers of legal ownership and physical relocations, which occur when ‘empires
       become weary’ (as Chuchu and Ngumi put it), they come to occupy a radically differ-
       ent political imaginary as struggles for freedom and as acts of disenclosure that chal-
       lenge the enduring effects of coloniality and dispossession. As the examples of three
       films on the theme of restitution show, this political work of disarticulating and frac-
       turing the colonial-extractive apparatus, also has ethical and reparative dimension.
       Destabilizing of the ‘thing/person dispositif’ by speech acts reclaiming objects from
       their colonial enclosures gives visibility to the broader cultural crisis of the ‘separa-
       tion between the human subject and the world of animate and inanimate objects’ that
       we are witnessing today (Mbembe in Confavreux, 2022, p. 129). This is largely due
       to positions that bring visibility to different politics and ethics of human and more-
       than-human relations, including pre-colonial and Indigenous peoples’ belief systems.
       From these perspectives, restitution is an opportunity to both radicalize decolonial
       justice struggles and to re-dramatize and complexify human and object relations
       within post-anthropocentric planetary ethics and politics.
       Acknowledgments Earlier versions of this article were presented as conference papers at the Humboldt
       Kolleg organized by Miguel Vatter at Trinity College at University of Melbourne and at the Annual Meet-
       ing of the Finnish Political Science Association at University of Lapland. I extend warm thanks to the
       following people for their comments and feedback: Elizabeth Shakman-Hurd, Dimitris Vardoulakis, and
       Miguel Vatter, as well as Kia Pyykkönen and Katarina Sjöblom, and two anonymous reviewers. This
       article is a research output of Academy Project funded by the Research Council of Finland (no. 360692)
       ‘Reframing Restitution: Postcolonial Object Movement, Transnational Memory and Social Repair’.
                                                             

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 18 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
       Funding Open Access funding provided by University of Jyväskylä (JYU).
                                                             
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use
       is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission
       directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n
       s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / .                               
       References                                            
       Akpang, C. (2024). Beyond the Neo-Imperial politicizing of object repatriation: Restitution and the ques-
         tion of decolonization. Art Journal Open. [online] Accessed 09 June 2025.
       Amo-Agyemang, C. (2024). Restitution of material objects and Indigenous ontology: Towards colonial-
         ity of Dispossession/Theft in Africa. International Journal of Cultural Policy. [online] Accessed 12
         June 2025.                                          
       Arndt, L. (2011). Thoughts on the reversal of the burden of proof as a postcolonial Lever. Trans. E. Buta-
         kova. One caption hides another (pp. 65–73). Betonsalon.
       Arora, A. (2021). Decolonizing the museum: Leila Aboulela’s ‘The museum.’ Journal of Postcolonial
         Writing, 57(1), 121–134.                            
       Azoulay, A. (2015). What are human rights? Comparative studies of South Asia. Africa and the Middle
         East, 35(1), 8–20.                                  
       Azoulay, A. (2019). Potential History: Unlearning Imperialism. Verso.
       Basu, P. (2017). The Inbetweenness of Things. In P. Basu (Ed.), The Inbetweenness of Things. Material-
         izing Mediation and Movement Between Worlds. (pp. 1–20). Bloomsbury.
       Brown, B. (2001). Thing theory. Critical Inquiry, 28(1), 1–22.
       Bruchac, M. (2024). Object Lessons. Reflexive research and restorative methodologies. In G. Nicholas,
         & J. Watkins (Eds.), Working as Indigenous archaeologists: Reckoning new paths between past and
         present lives. Routledge.                           
       Bryant, L. (2011). The Democracy of Objects. Open Humanities Press.
       Butler, J. (1997). Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative. Routledge.
       Chuchu, J., & Ngumi, N. (2023). When the Empire Gets Weary the Objects May Return. Talking Objects
         Lab. [online] Accessed 30 June 2024.                
       Clark, C., Emmanouil, N., Page, J., & Pelizzon, A. (2019). Can you hear the rivers sing? Legal person-
         hood, ontology, and the nitty-gritty of governance. Ecology Law Quarterly, 45, 787–844.
       Collison, L. (2022). Command/Commandment. Critical Theory for Political Thelogy. [online] Accessed
         on 12 June 2025.                                    
       Collison, L. (2024). Dahomey Dossier de Presse Francais [online] Accessed 30 April 2025.
       Confavreux, J. (2022). Decolonial anxieties in a postcolonial world: An interview with Achille Mbembe.
         Trans. D. Broder. Postcolonial Studies, 25(1), 128–135.
       D’Angelo, D. (2022). A new path of thinking for europe? Care for Life, Personhood, and the place of
         thought in Roberto esposito’. Political Theology, 23(3), 215–230.
       De Line, S. (2018). Weaving Reflections—On museology and the repatriation of Indigenous beings from
         ethnological collections. Bauhaus Imaginista [online] Accessed 26 September 2024.
       Dehnert, M., & Gunkel, D. (2025). Beyond ownership: Human–Robot relationships between property and
         personhood. New Media & Society, 27(2), 1110–1126.  
       Diagne, S. B. (2023). African Art as philosophy: Senghor, Bergson, and the Idea of negritude. Trans. Ch.
         Jeffers. Other.                                     
       Diagne, S. B. (2024). Mutant African Objects and the Question of Restitution. Lecture at Musée
         d’ethnographie, Genève. 06 March.                   
       Esposito, R. (2011). Third Person: Politics of Life and Philosophy of the Impersonal. Polity.
       Esposito, R. (2012a). The Dispositif of the person. Law Culture and the Humanities, 8(1), 17–30.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Reframing restitution with Roberto Esposito and Achille Mbembe:… Page 19 of 20 30
       Esposito, R. (2012b). The third Person. Politics of life and philosophy of the impersonal. Trans. Z. Hanafi.
         Polity.                                             
       Esposito, R. (2015). Persons and things: From the body’s point of view. Trans. Z. Hanafi. Polity.
       Esposito, R. (2016). Persons and things. Trans L Chiesa Paragraph, 39(1), 26–35.
       Halewood, M. (2014). Facts as social things. In R. Faber, & A. Goffey (Eds.), The allure of Things. Process
         and object in contemporary philosophy (pp. 123–144). Bloomsbury.
       Kim, E. (2024). The Politics of Collecting: Race and the Aestheticization of Property. Duke University
         Press.                                              
       Kohn, M., & McBride, K. (2011). Political Theories of Decolonization: Postcolonialism and the Problem
         of Foundations. Oxford University Press.            
       Lanfranchi, B. (2019). The postcolonial condition and its possible futures in Achille Mbembe, Tsenay
         Serequeberhan, and Lewis R. Gordon. Journal of World Philosophies, 4, 188–200.
       LeGall, Y., & Machona, G. (2022). Possessions, Spoils of War, Belongings: What Museum Archives Tell
         Us About the (Il)Legality of the Plunder of African Property. Verfassungsblog: On Matters Constitu-
         tional. [online] Accessed 14 June 2025.             
       Losson, P. (2022). Reparation or perpetuation? Physical and symbolic violence in restitutions of cultural
         heritage. Items, 07 June.                           
       Macdonald, B. (2022). Pausing, Reflection, and action: Decolonizing museum practices. Journal of
         Museum Education, 47(1), 8–17.                      
       Maranda, L. (2021). Decolonization within the museum. ICOFOM, 49(2), 180–195.
       Markell, P. (2003). Bound by Recognition. Princeton University Press.
       Mbembe, A. (2001). On the Postcolony. University of California Press.
       Mbembe, A. (2018a). Of African Objects in Western Museums. Lecture at Gerda Henkel Foundation.
         [online] Accessed 04 November 2023.                 
       Mbembe, A. (2018b). Recognition, Reparation, Reconciliation. Lecture at Stellenbosch University.
         [online] Accessed 08 November 2023.                 
       Mbembe, A. (2019a). African Objects in Western Thought. Lecture at Wits University. [online] Accessed
         10 November 2023.                                   
       Mbembe, A. (2019b). People and Things in African Systems of Thought’. Lecture at Wits University.
         [online] Accessed 14 November 2023.                 
       Mbembe, A. (2019c). Debt, Reparation, Restitution’. Lecture at Wits University. [online] Accessed 16
         November 2023.                                      
       Mbembe, A. (2019d). Memory and Restitution. Lecture at University of Cologne. [online] Accessed 28
         November 2023.                                      
       Mbembe, A. (2021). Out of the dark Night. Essays on decolonization. Columbia University.
       Mbembe, A. (2024). Brutalism. Trans. S. Corcoran. Duke University Press.
       McMahon, J. (2017). The Enigma of Biopolitics: Antiblackness, Modernity, and Roberto Esposito’s Bio-
         politics. Political Theory, 46(5), 749–771.         
       Moreton-Robinson, A. (2020). Incommensurable Sovereignties. Indigenous ontology matters. In B.
         Hokowhitu, A. Moreton-Robinson, L. Tuhiwai-Smith, S. Andersen, & S. Larkin (Eds.), Routledge
         handbook of critical Indigenous studies (pp. 257–268). Routledge.
       Mugabowagahunde, M. (2016). African Indigenous heritage in colonial and postcolonial museums. In W.
         Logan, M. N. Craith, & U. Kockel (Eds.), A companion to heritage studies (pp. 146–160). Blackwell.
       Mussawir, E., & Parsley, C. (2017). The law of persons today: At the margins of jurisprudence. Law and
         Humanities, 11(1), 44–63.                           
       Ngumi, N. (2022). Can Art Change Kenya? BBC HARDtalk. 07 June.
       Nichols, R. (2018). Theft is Property! The recursive logic of dispossession. Political Theory, 46(1), 3–28.
       Peffer, J. (2005). Africa’s diasporas of images. Third Text, 19(4), 339–355.
       Pelizzon, A., Martuwarra RiverOfLife, Akhtar-Khavari, A., Clark, C., Laborde, S., Macpherson, E.,
         O’Bryan, K., O’Donnell, E., & Page, J. (2021). Yoongoorrookoo: The emergence of ancestral per-
         sonhood. Griffith Law Review, 30(3), 505–529.       
       Prażmowska-Marcinowska, K. (2022). Repatriation of Indigenous Peoples’ cultural property. Santander
         Art and Culture Law Review, 8(2), 135–58.           
       Rappaport, N. (2017). Making Things, Things. In L. Atzmon, P. Boradkar (eds.) Encountering Things.
         Design and Theories of Things. Bloomsbury, 95–108.  
       Reeves, J.-A., & Peters, T. (2021). Responding to anthropocentrism with anthropocentrism: The biopoli-
         tics of environmental personhood. Griffith Law Review, 30(3), 474–504.

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        30 Page 20 of 20                         M. Zolkos   
       Ringer, C. (2021). Achille Mbembe. Critical Theory for Political Thelogy. [online] Accessed on 04 Janu-
         ary 2025.                                           
       Roodt, C. (2025). Restoring the Law of Restitution of Cultural Property: Complex Colonial Histories.
         Routledge.                                          
       Rosiek, J., Snyder, J., & Pratt, S. (2020). The new materialisms and Indigenous theories of Non-Human
         agency: Making the case for respectful anti-colonial engagement. Qualitative Inquiry, 26(3–4),
         331–346.                                            
       Sarr, F. (2019). Restitution of African Artifacts: The Next. Step, a New Relational Ethic. Lecture at Uni-
         versity of Cologne. [online] Accessed 09 April 2025.
       Sarr, F., & Savoy, B. (2018). The Restitution of African Cultural Heritage. Trans. S. Burk. [online]
         Accessed 03 January 2025.                           
       Säynäjäkangas, J. (2025). Resource Relationships: A Political Ontology for the Anthropocene. PhD The-
         sis. University of Jyväskyl&#228.                   
       Shachar, A. (2020). The Shifting Border: Legal Cartographies of Migration and Mobility. Manchester
         University Press.                                   
       Vallor, S. (2011). Carebots and caregivers: Sustaining the ethical ideal of care in the Twenty-First century.
         Philosophy & Technology, 24(3), 251–268.            
       Vatter, M., & De Leeuw, M. (2023). Human rights, legal personhood and the impersonality of embodied
         life. Law, Culture and the Humanities, 19(1), 106–125.
       Vermeulen, P. (2017). How should a person be (Transpersonal)? Ben Lerner, Roberto Esposito, and the
         biopolitics of the future. Political Theory, 45(5), 659–681.
       Wali, A., & Collins, R. (2023). Decolonizing museums: Toward a paradigm shift. Annual Review of
         Anthropology, 52(1), 329–345.                       
       Zolkos, M. (2020). Restitution and the Politics of Repair. Edinburgh University Press.
       Zolkos, M. (2025). Reclaiming Hinemihi through Rematriation: Victoria Hunt’s Cinematic and Perfor-
         mance Art as Memory Activism. Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies (online
         first).                                             
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
       Magdalena Zolkos is associate professor at the department of social sciences and philosophy at the Uni-
       versity of Jyväskylä, Finland. She is the author of Restitution and the Politics of Repair (Edinburgh Uni-
       versity Press, 2020).                                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             