[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:6             
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00785-6            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Thinking about democracy in turbulent times           
                                                             
       John Keane, Edinburgh University Press, 2025, Edinburgh, 156 pp.,
       ISBN 978 1 3995 4519 8                                
                                                             
       Christof Royer1                                       
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       John Keane opens his 2022 Sorbonne Lectures with the announcement that it is
       necessary to rethink ‘in radically unorthodox ways, the subject of democracy’ at a
       moment when contemporary thought ‘is failing to come to grips with the predica-
       ments, problems and puzzles of our age’ (pp. vii–viii). Democratic theory, Keane
       argues, is not up to the task because it is plagued by ‘professional thoughtlessness’—
       a common condition in universities, think tanks, and other institutions, where ‘homo
       academicus has little or no time or taste for thinking about the precepts and preju-
       dices of democracy, or for thinking about thinking’ (p. xii). Yet to my mind, Keane
       fails to deliver, and the book that grew out of these five lectures is a disappointment.
       It reads largely as a rumination on the author’s earlier ideas, it revolves around a one-
       dimensional conception of democracy, and a barrage of clichés undermines the very
       ideas Keane insists lie at the heart of democracy—uncertainty and ambiguity.
         ‘Thinking is for Everyone’ is both the title and the key claim of the first lecture.
       Why might that be controversial? Keane points to several thinkers—Heidegger,
       Arendt, Kierkegaard, Smith—who were preoccupied with the ‘problem of thought-
       lessness’ and who, he argues, reserved thinking for ‘a class of writers, poets, philoso-
       phers, political thinkers, theologians, journalists, scientists and academicians’ (p. 10).
       Against this elitism, Keane draws primarily on Wittgenstein to advance two argu-
       ments: that thinking is indeed ‘for everyone’, and that thinking is a ‘public matter’
       rather than a solitary pursuit. This is one of the stronger chapters, but it also illustrates
       the difficulty of thinking about thinking. The move to make thinking a ‘public matter’
       is highly problematic from a privacy perspective, and Keane leaves open the deeper
       question of what thinking is actually for. What does it mean that there is ‘a definite
       impracticality about thinking’ (p. 36)? Granted, thinking may resist the parameters of
       Zweckrationalität (p. 33), but that hardly makes its value self-evident. Still less does
                                                             
         Christof Royer                                      
         christof.royer@forward-college.eu                   
       1 Forward College, Paris 74014, France                
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        6  Page 2 of 4                            C. Royer   
                                                             
       it explain formulaic pronouncements such as the claim that thinking is an ‘egalitar-
       ian, adventurous, and rebellious—democratic—spirit’ (p. 1) Thus the diligent student
       leaves the first lecture stimulated, but also somewhat underwhelmed.
         In ‘Living with Uncertainty’, the title of the second lecture, Keane argues that
       democracy is the only form of rule that accepts and even embraces uncertainty, while
       all other regimes ‘try to handle uncertainty by hiding it away’ (p. 52). This is true. But
       it is here that the irony haunting the book shows most clearly. Keane tirelessly extols
       the virtues of ‘monitory democracy’—a form of democracy that relentlessly scruti-
       nises the actions of the powerful, holds them accountable, and ensures they do not
       abuse their might. Ironically, though, in this account uncertainty itself all but disap-
       pears: Democracy becomes a watchdog that keeps power in check; it is leaders who
       suffer from ‘hubris’, act with ‘cocksure certainty’, or are ‘blind fools’ (p. 56). And it
       is democracy’s task to protect citizens from their excesses. This one-dimensionality
       is the greatest weakness of Keane’s democratic vision—a point to which I will return.
       For now, I would only add that the strongest passages of this chapter are those in
       which Keane genuinely allows space for uncertainty and ambiguity—particularly
       in the final sections, where he acknowledges a link between democratic uncertainty,
       equality, and public ressentiment (pp. 57–58). Unfortunately, though, Keane stops
       short of seriously engaging this problem, evading rather than confronting complexity
       and uncertainty in a chapter ostensibly devoted to these themes.
         It’s lecture three—and I really wish I had slept in. The chapter (‘Rethinking Civil
       Society’) reads less like an attempt to rethink civil society than a plea to revive
       Keane’s own conception of it. Why this revival is needed remains unclear. The argu-
       ment, as far as I can tell, is that democracy requires civil society because civil soci-
       ety embodies the ideals of monitory democracy. And the group tasked with carrying
       out this revival is, apparently, ‘the Left’. Unfortunately, the chapter is so cluttered
       with clichés that it becomes difficult to identify a concrete argument. Civil society,
       Keane tells us, is essentially ‘a call for nuanced and alert thinking’ (p. 85). ‘The Left’
       is said to have a special role because it represents ‘the ethics of humility against
       arrogance and hubris’ (p. 85). A civil society of the Left, we are assured, has clearly
       defined aims: to ‘build a better future for all’ (p. 90); to promote ‘mutual respect
       instead of spiteful contempt for people with different views’ (p. 89); and to support
       ‘various struggles for respect by many different groups of citizens’ (p. 80). Is this
       the wisdom meant to rouse us from our drowsiness, to free us from our professional
       thoughtlessness?                                      
         Chapter 4, ‘Democracy on Earth’, is different. With greater critical bite, Keane
       simultaneously challenges those who doubt that green politics can be democratic and
       also deliberative democrats who have essentially abandoned representative politics.
       Keane’s critique is hard-hitting, comparing the prophets of climate-catastrophism to
       self-appointed ‘supreme pontiffs authorised to issue apostolic letters’ (p. 114). The
       way forward, he insists, does not lie in pontificating or short-circuiting politics, but
       in an idea of representation grounded in a fiduciary relationship between Nature and
       humanity (p. 116).                                    
         In many respects, this is the most interesting chapter of the book, as it mounts a
       refreshing democratic critique of contemporary green politics without neglecting the
       hard business of democratic politics. This theme resurfaces in the somewhat mean-

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Thinking about democracy in turbulent times Page 3 of 4 6
                                                             
       dering final lecture (‘How Democracies Die Fast and Slow’), where the book turns
       to the problem of ‘democide’. Keane offers a critical insight here: democracy’s most
       dangerous enemies may well be ‘unthinking citizens, groups, and institutions’ that
       live in denial of the dynamics linking climate change, emergency politics, and anti-
       democratic tendencies (pp. 150–151). But this insight also dodges the hard question:
       climate change—like any other contemporary problem—requires the exercise of
       power. It cannot be solved in practice, nor adequately addressed in theory, by focus-
       ing solely on the restriction of power. What if democracies may die not only from
       abuses of power but also from the suffocation of democratic power itself?
         Zooming out, one of the broader issues I have with this book is Keane’s constant
       claim to ‘radically rethink’ democracy (or aspects of it) while merely rehashing older
       ideas—mostly his own. The truth is, this book offers little that is new, and I am sur-
       prised that such an empty claim survived peer review and editorial scrutiny. Across
       150 pages, I counted 48 references to Keane’s own work—ironically alongside 20
       invocations of ‘humility’. Whatever its stated aim, the book certainly does not ‘radi-
       cally rethink’ anything. Its true purpose, rather, seems to be the celebration of Keane’s
       long-standing concept of ‘monitory democracy’. Monitory democracy, however, has
       always suffered from one-dimensionality. Consider the following characterisation:
         re-imagined in terms of precaution, monitory democracy, the most power-sen-
         sitive form of self-government in the history of democracy, is the best weapon
         so far invented for guarding against the illusions of certainty by breaking up
         monopolies of unaccountable and dangerous power, wherever and however
         they operate. Democracy protects people against those who deny their own
         ignorance (p.55).                                   
       Reducing democracy to a mere watchdog function, however, is a strategy to evade
       the complexities, ambiguities, and uncertainties of democratic life. For democracy is
       not only about restraining power; it is also about constructing it. Democracy is based
       on the idea that politics requires power and that the best way to institutionalise this
       undeniable truth is to place power in the hands of those most affected by it.
         Now, Keane rightly rejects the myth that the ‘people’ form a collective subject;
       however, he also fundamentally downplays the idea that democratically elected
       leaders possess a mandate to exercise power. Keane shows little regard for that—he
       even sees parallels between the exploitative logic of environmental degradation and
       electoral democracy (pp. 97–101). In truth, his dismissal of contestation, elections,
       and power is much more in line with contemporary democratic theory—especially
       with the deliberative theorists he likes to attack—than he admits. Yet, the purpose
       of democracy cannot be reduced to the restriction of power when that very power
       is itself a product of democratic processes. There is, indeed, a fine balance to be
       struck between the construction and the taming of power—and this is where demo-
       cratic ambiguity and uncertainty arises. However, Keane’s simplistic vision in which
       democracy simply means reigning in ‘arrogant bosses and bullies’ (p. 22) has no time
       for balance; it prefers the complacent sense of superiority that usually accompanies
       moralism.                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        6  Page 4 of 4                            C. Royer   
                                                             
         The book does have its interesting moments. Keane’s brief reflections on the link
       between equality and ressentiment hint at the true complexities of democratic poli-
       tics; his defence of representative democracy against the prophets of climate change
       is a reminder of the promise of representation; his rejection of catastrophism as opti-
       mism dressed up in pessimism is a perceptive demasking of the hubris underlying
       these projects (pp. 48ff, 126ff). Ultimately, however, the book remains chained to a
       less-than-compelling conception of democracy, which Keane attempts to embellish
       with platitudes and moralism and to sell as ‘radical rethinking’. Perhaps this material
       made for good lectures. But who says every lecture series needs to be turned into a
       book?                                                 
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             