[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:28            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00784-7            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Democratic elitism: the founding myth of American     
       political science                                     
                                                             
       Natasha Piano, Harvard university Press, Cambridge MA, 2025,
       x + 243pp., ISBN: 9780674295377                       
                                                             
       Gordon Arlen1                                         
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Chapter three of Democratic Elitism, the remarkable new monograph by Natasha
       Piano, begins with an epigraph by Nietzsche (abridged here): ‘the hardest thing to
       translate from one language into another is the tempo of its style…How could the
       German language…imitate Machiavelli’s tempo…who…allows one to breath the
       fine dry air of Florence?’ (p. 83).                   
         The perils of mistranslation drive Piano’s reengagement with the ‘modern Machi-
       avellians’: Vilfredo Pareto, Gaetano Mosca, and the German émigré to Italy Robert
       Michels, who together constitute the Italian school of elitism, a group bookended by
       the Austrian Joseph Schumpeter. Together, they continue to influence modern social
       science (as Piano reminds us, Schumpeter’s Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy
       is the third most cited social science text after Karl Marx’s Capital and Adam Smith’s
       Wealth of Nations) (p. 117). Yet on Piano’s telling, prominence has not produced
       clarity.                                              
         Through first-rate scholarship and beautiful writing, Piano shows how American
       political science continually fails to ‘breath the fine dry air of Florence’ when appro-
       priating modern Italian thinkers, with consequences both scholastic—bad intellectual
       history—and political: failure to soberly confront the twin challenges of plutocracy
       and demagoguery.                                      
         Normatively, the book unifies around a central concern: the dangers of conflat-
       ing democracy with contested elections. Treating elections as the sine qua non of
       democracy introduces a false veneer of equality in deeply plutocratic environments.
       When plutocracy prevents elections from delivering on their democratic promise,
       disillusionment results, ‘ultimately destroying faith in elections writ large’ (p. 21).
       Populist elites channel electoral resentment to undermine democracy further. Pareto
                                                             
         Gordon Arlen                                        
         gordon.arlen@unimelb.edu.au                         
       1 University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        28 Page 2 of 4                            G. Arlen   
                                                             
       and Mosca keenly grasped a dilemma that was strangely foreign to Robert Dahl,
       Adam Przeworski and other advocates of behavioralist, empirical, and/or ‘minimal-
       ist’ accounts of electoral democracy, who erroneously appropriated Italian theory for
       their purposes.                                       
         In response, Piano offers a ‘revisionist genealogy’ which unfolds in six chapters,
       each guided by an overarching interpretive frame: Pareto’s ‘angry warning’ (chapter
       one) juxtaposed with Mosca’s ‘sober cynicism’ (chapter two); Michels’ position ‘on
       the edge of fatalism’ (chapter three) matched with Schumpeter’s ‘sardonic irony’
       (chapter four). The manuscript concludes by deconstructing the ‘hopeful panic’
       (chapter five) of postwar American political scientists, who replaced the critical pes-
       simism of Italian elite theory with the optimism of the behavioral revolution, prompt-
       ing flurried responses from participatory democrats like Carole Pateman, with neither
       side truly finding its footing.                       
         Piano’s methodology is distinctive, combining literary sensibilities, Cambridge-
       school reception history, and textual exegesis that performs close reading without
       any idiosyncratic Straussian esotericism. Indeed, Piano’s commitment to ‘disposi-
       tional readings’ (p. 15), to excavating the dispositions infusing different historical
       contexts, utilizes the ‘rhetorical tone and nuance clearly detectable within a text—a
       tone available to any readership’, not just a select few (p. 15). Piano intricately situ-
       ates her historical work within contemporary democratic theory. This combination
       works elegantly and grants the book diverse audiences.
         Piano’s readings of Pareto and Mosca are seminal—here the interpretive proj-
       ect feels most urgent. Both authors developed intricate critical apparatuses, borne
       of the distinct plutocratic environment of the Italian Risorgimento and its aftermath.
       Pareto (among the first thinkers to deploy the term ‘elite’ in a systematic fashion) (pp.
       28-29) criticized Italy’s nexus of political, economic, and military elites which, on
       the heels of World War I, engaged in corrupt protectionist policies and other practices
       that hurt ordinary people. Mosca was more attuned to economic disparities between
       Italy’s North and South, worrying that elections, when imposed by Northern elites to
       legitimate political domination of the South, would create rampant cynicism among
       Southerners, emboldening the mafia.                   
         Their lessons are clear: when plutocracy allows elites to escape accountability,
       elections risk only amplifying popular disillusionment. This does not render elections
       unimportant, but it does mean the democratic horizon must extend deeper, beyond
       the electoral system, if democracy is to overcome plutocracy.
         Piano insightfully demonstrates why Mosca and Pareto are so vulnerable to mis-
       readings. Superficially, they seem critical of democracy from an ‘elitist’ perspective,
       even as their main target is elite perversion of democracy. They echo Machiavellian
       elite theory, but go farther—from Mosca’s perspective, Machiavelli was not pes-
       simistic enough, as the plutocratic Risorgimento makes Machiavelli’s account of
       domination ‘seem benign’ (p. 73). Michels, by contrast, was more detached from
       the Italian context, and his ‘iron law of oligarchy’, while pathbreaking, ultimately
       resonated more with Weber than with the Italian tradition. Each thinker must be read
       uniquely, Piano shows, not lumped together in the three-headed mass popularized by
       postwar discourse.                                    

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Democratic elitism: the founding myth of American political science Page 3 of 4 28
                                                             
         Yet all three flirted with fascism, a reality shadowing the study. Perhaps Piano
       could more forcefully acknowledge just how close Mosca and Pareto come to dis-
       crediting themselves as serious resources for contemporary theory. Nonetheless,
       Piano carefully extricates them from this potentially fatal blemish, and is generally
       persuasive, both for historical reasons (Mosca turned against fascism and Pareto died
       in 1923, long before its zenith) and through her own interpretive skill (though she
       never condones their errors in judgment). Ironically, Michels—the most commit-
       ted fascist of the three—enjoyed the most pro-democratic reception among postwar
       political science, furthering Piano’s argument about mistranslation.
         That fascism is often considered Italy’s chief political export drives another of
       Piano’s aims: vindicating modern Italian thought on issues beyond fascism. Indeed,
       the book is most provocative when speaking of an Italian disposition, or sensibility,
       which offers distinct resources for critiquing plutocracy; an Italian tempo, evolving
       from the Renaissance through to the present, a tempo not easily reproducible outside
       Italy. This is a bold and generative claim, with major methodological implications. If
       the Italian experience has historically taken a backseat to German and Anglo-Ameri-
       can discourses, Piano makes a strong case for correcting that imbalance. How would
       embracing Italian politics, in all its messiness, reshape the field of political theory?
       While John McCormick’s seminal account of Machiavellian democracy has revi-
       talized interest in Florentine and neo-Roman plebeian politics (McCormick, 2011;
       Vergara, 2020), Piano brings us closer to the present, with an arguably less trendy but
       more presentist focus on early twentieth century thinkers.
         Still, I wish Piano had more systematically developed this line of argument. What
       exactly is the anti-plutocratic Italian tempo, what are its major and minor cadences,
       how do they translate to specific linguistic nuances and cultural forms? Such system-
       atization may go against Piano’s delicate efforts, as a historian of political thought,
       to let the archive speak for itself. However, I think interpretive balance can be main-
       tained, with just a little more effort at systematization.
         Piano’s normative vision becomes clearest in her concluding remarks about the
       Italian conception of buon governo, or good governance, a tradition traceable from
       the renaissance to the present. A regime that achieves buon governo (through elite
       accountability) can be worthy, even without meeting contemporary liberalism’s
       exacting standards of procedural fairness, equality, and distributive justice. Buon
       governo means mitigating domination by teaching elites to self-police their own
       dominating tendencies. It has a strong realist component, consistent with the general
       Machiavellian framing hovering over Italian political thought.
         Still, it’s not immediately clear why Italy holds a singular place in the genealogy of
       anti-plutocratic discourse. Italy is not the only context where plutocratic forces have
       proliferated and generated critical responses. Consider nineteenth century utilitarian
       critiques of elite ‘sinister interest’, ( Arlen, 2023) or early twentieth century Ameri-
       can progressive attacks on monopoly power (Rahman, 2016) to name a few. Piano’s
       mastery of the Italian language (her previous work includes translating Guicciardini)
       makes her uniquely positioned to explain what we get from the Italian case that
       eludes us in these other contexts. I hope she returns to those questions in future work.
         I cannot close without mentioning Piano’s extraordinary reading of Schumpeter. If
       Mosca and Pareto are the book’s bread and butter, the Schumpeter chapter is its most

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        28 Page 4 of 4                            G. Arlen   
                                                             
       boundary-pushing. Piano forcefully defends what she calls ‘Schumpeter’s dare’:
       Schumpeter dared elites to redefine democracy as competitive election, and to apply
       economic language to the political sphere through a more empirically grounded polit-
       ical science, a dare sardonically ‘carried out via irony and other rhetorical cues’ (p.
       140). Schumpeter implored elites to ‘call a spade a spade’ (p. 140) and to be more
       forthright about the dawning era of electoral politics, to embrace ‘an uncertain path
       forward and invent something entirely new’ (p. 140). On Piano’s reading, Schumpet-
       er’s famous defense of ‘minimalist’ democracy was mainly ironic, couched through
       the dare, rather than truly programmatic; yet it succeeded spectacularly, as elites took
       him up on the offer to redefine democracy on minimalist electoral terms.
         The Schumpeter chapter thus shows Piano at her most daring, because it relies
       so much on interpretive creativity. This reading is vulnerable to criticism, but with
       so much credibility built up in the preceding chapters, readers are compelled to fol-
       low Piano’s lead. The result is an entirely new framing of Schumpeterian ‘minimal-
       ist’ democracy, a new account of the sardonic, ironic founding of modern political
       science.                                              
         Here the reader encounters the sheer joy of political theory as a vocation designed
       to produce awe and wonderment; an art of interpretation, where the author’s faith
       inspires similar faith in the reader, drawing both down the road less traveled. With
       liberal democracy still under assault (for many of the reasons identified by the Ital-
       ians) we should all heed Piano’s warnings, while embracing the regenerative spirit of
       her interpretive art.                                 
       Acknowledgments I thank Alexander R. Cohen for copyediting assistance.
       References                                            
                                                             
       Vergara, C. (2020). Systemic Corruption: Constitutional Ideas for an Anti-Oligarchic Republic. Princeton.
       University Press.                                     
       Arlen, G. (2023). Liberal plebeianism: J.S. Mill on Democracy, Oligarchy, and Working-Class mobiliza-
       tion. American Political Science Review, 117(1), 249–262.
       McCormick, J. (2011). Machiavellian democracy. Cambridge University Press.
       Rahman, K.S. (2016). Democracy against domination. Oxford University Press.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             