[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:854–857       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00761-0            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Contesting the far right: a psychoanalytic and feminist
       critical theory approach                              
                                                             
       Claudia Leeb: Columbia University Press, 2024, 336pp., ISBN:
       9780231213073                                         
                                                             
       Candice K. Travis1                                    
                                                             
       Published online: 18 April 2025                       
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       Claudia Leeb’s Contesting the Far Right provides scholars of contemporary far-right
       politics with stable, multidimensional theoretical ground to stand upon. Her use of
       critical theory, psychoanalysis, and decolonial theory is crucial for building a frame-
       work to understand some of the impulses which drive right-wing radicalization. The
       central question of her book is: Why is it that citizens turn to hateful, racist, and
       regressive politics that often run directly counter to their own self-interest?
         Leeb’s book has numerous strengths. First, she provides a rich articulation of the
       dialectic between socioeconomic and psychological factors driving the rise of the
       far right. Recognition that these dimensions work together is an important interven-
       tion where many sources tend to focus either on one or the other. Often right-wing
       adherents are either pathologized or called ‘deplorable’, their intelligence demeaned
       as they are seen as not really understanding the source of their economic plight.
       Strikingly, the conversation lacks real consideration about the political effects of
       sustained alienation, stress, and anxiety felt under precarity capitalism. Here Leeb’s
       critical theory is integral. Paired with a psychoanalytic approach, Leeb provides a
       rich consideration of how rhetoric and political speech functions to unlock/unleash a
       scapegoating desire that displaces anxiety and locates the blame squarely on histori-
       cally constructed ‘Others’.                           
         Leeb also offers clarification of the usefulness of ‘fascism’ for understanding the
       contemporary far right. There has been some hesitation to deploy this word for fear
       that doing so would either convolute the fascism of the twentieth century, that it
       would mischaracterize the situation, or that it would shut down conversation about
       the contemporary far right. Leeb takes the category head on, with incredibly fruit-
       ful results. Leeb shows that it is important to understand the ways in which fascist
       propaganda and the rhetoric of the contemporary far right operate in a non-rational
       *                                                     
         Candice K. Travis                                   
         candice.travis@quinnipiac.edu                       
       1 Quinnipiac University, Hamden, CT 06518, USA        
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contesting the far right: a psychoanalytic and feminist critical… 855
                                                             
       register. However, this does not imply that adherence to the far right does not have a
       logic that ought to be taken seriously. Leeb shows how to do this using critical and
       psychoanalytic theory.                                
         Further, the book offers a convincing explanation of the ways in which precar-
       ity capitalism renders us non-whole, castrated, suffering, lacking. The discussion
       of ‘wholeness’ permits an analysis of the ways in which far-right propaganda preys
       on this lacking self. Leeb says it best: ‘far-right propaganda techniques prey upon
       our wounds and our scars, generated in our childhoods, in our daily (work) lives in
       precarity capitalism, and through living in nations with violent histories’ (p. 14).
       In other words, despite providing a temporary salve for the wounded, non-whole
       self, far-right politics do not address the objective, structural, pre-existing conditions
       which create the castrated self in the first place. In showing this, Leeb argues that
       structural change is necessary if we want to make any real headway in preventing
       adherence to far-right propaganda.                    
         Grappling with key cases in Austria and the United States, Leeb’s account details
       how followers experience an ecstatic high on account of Trump’s cult of personality
       (pp. 94–120); how the alt-right offers temporary relief in the form of ‘jokes’ which
       serve as sexually and racially aggressive (pp. 121–154); how the Austrian Freedom
       Party hinders real grappling with Austria’s Nazi past, exploiting and repressing guilt
       (pp. 155–188); and how the pan-European Identitarian Movement deploys psycho-
       logical techniques which allow potential followers to displace feelings of failure to
       be the ‘successful white European man’—an ideal derived from Europe’s colonial
       and fascist past (pp. 189–220).                       
         The book invites several questions: first, about melancholia and nostalgia; second,
       about the role of religion, millenarianism, and conspiracy theories; and third, about
       the role of women in far-right spaces. True to its psychoanalytic approach, Leeb’s
       book provides important discussion of melancholia as a reaction to feelings of loss,
       lacking a clearly lost object. Accordingly, the inability to mourn the lost object
       leaves affected subjects in a state of depression, easily co-opted by fascist propa-
       ganda techniques. In Leeb’s argument, melancholia is sublimated through mania,
       where propaganda helps affected subjects feel ‘whole’ again; this is evidenced in
       Trump’s rally speeches. However, this misses an important piece of MAGA propa-
       ganda; implicit in ‘making America great again’ is the idea of longing for and recov-
       ering a lost past. Propagandists of the far right see the lack, the non-wholeness, the
       anxiety, the feeling of loss, and capitalize on that by triggering nostalgic feelings
       for a lost national homeland in which these problems did not exist. It is a version of
       return to the ego ideal, where a shallow wholeness can exist for a fleeting moment,
       where a shallow perfection stands in for what is impossible to achieve under condi-
       tions of precarity capitalism. To what extent, then, do nostalgic desires to return to
       a great past or to recover a lost ego ideal fit into Leeb’s psychoanalytic framework?
       Indeed, one of Leeb’s main arguments shows how the inability to grapple with the
       real traumas of our pasts—manifest either as tendency to ignore those pasts or to
       look at them with rose-colored glasses—primes listeners for far-right propaganda.
         Second, it has become increasingly difficult to talk about the far right without
       addressing its connection to some interpretation and implementation of Christian-
       ity. For example, in the U.S. Christian Nationalism is a central concern—where

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       856                                       C. K. Travis
                                                             
       the idea is to establish a national homeland built based on Christian values.
       Indeed, this has been displayed in contemporary religious movements like the
       New Apostolic Reformation (Taylor, 2024). But religious nationalism, at least in
       the U.S., allows veiling of the desire to build a racialized homeland. This Leeb
       convincingly shows by detailing how ideals and values had been long estab-
       lished as part of a colonial and racist past—i.e. white, European, and ‘traditional’.
       Where does religion fit into Leeb’s discussion? The alt-right does portray itself as
       atheist (p. 143), but at the same time dabbles in religious, millenarian, and apoca-
       lyptic themes, as do some of its right-wing counterparts. Noting that ‘Christian
       civilization’ indeed shapes the American ego ideal, scholars must pay attention to
       religious and Christian dimension of adherence to far-right ideals.
         Relatedly, conspiracy theories, including those with a millenarian aspect—
       which assume an imminent fundamental social, religious, and political shift—
       have had varied presence across far-right movements. Leeb notes the Great
       Replacement theory, which argues that ‘white genocide’ orchestrated by Jew-
       ish masterminds to have illegal immigrants replace white families is allegedly
       under way. This conspiracy theory features prominently in the alt-right and has
       appeared in the manifestoes of ‘lone wolf’ mass shooters. The Great Replace-
       ment theory is a classic expression of anti-semitism, akin to the Protocols of the
       Elders of Zion (Nazi leaders used this a key part of their propaganda; notably the
       Protocols were published by Henry Ford in the U.S. and read by the infamous
       American Nazi Party leader George Lincoln Rockwell). One set of considerations
       to deepen Leeb’s account follows from considering the extent to which adherence
       to conspiracy theories fits within the dialectic of socioeconomics and psychol-
       ogy. Is there a link between adherence to conspiracy theories and buy-in to fascist
       propaganda? If conspiracy theories prime a listener for fascist propaganda, then
       scholars can explore the potentially serious political effects of conspiracy theory
       adherence.                                            
         Finally, what attracts women to far-right politics, especially the far-right poli-
       tics that flaunts sexually explicit, aggressive, hypermasculine, and violent tenets?
       This can in part be addressed by Leeb’s framework: in part, women also experi-
       ence subjective suffering which they aim to ameliorate, whether or not their polit-
       ical participation is geared towards leaders and policies which would address the
       objective conditions which create their suffering. In other words, it is possible to
       psychoanalytically understand why it is that women appear to act outside of their
       own self-interest. Part of this question, though, has to do with the consistently effec-
       tive appeals that the far right, like the alt-right or the Tea Party, makes toward men,
       on account of that ego ideal of manhood or masculinity which precarity capitalism
       inhibits. Where do the women fit in here? What about these kinds of appeals also
       appeal to women? How can we understand the trad wife trend, for example? Is this
       a replication or distortion of a ‘republican motherhood’ ego ideal? Is this an attempt
       to hold on to a different kind of ego ideal?          
         Leeb’s book also leaves scholars with other questions around the category of pop-
       ulism, around how radicalization toward violence happens, around whether there are
       some people here who are just plain old cruel or narcissistic, around which people
       are the ones doing the exploiting and whether we can psychoanalyze them a bit, too.

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contesting the far right: a psychoanalytic and feminist critical… 857
                                                             
       In all, Leeb’s book is an incredible basis for having real conversations about adher-
       ence to right-wing politics, one that we need now and for the future.
                                                             
                                                             
       Reference                                             
                                                             
       Taylor, M.D. (2024) The violent take it by force: The Christian movement that is threatening democracy.
         Broadleaf Books.                                    
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             