[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:22            
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-026-00799-8            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Elites and democracy                                  
                                                             
       Hugo Drochon, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2026, xvi + 296
       pp., ISBN: 9780691181554                              
                                                             
       Nicholas Tampio1                                      
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       As a graduate student at Indiana University, I took Jeffrey C. Isaac’s seminar on
       democratic theory. The unit that perplexed me was on the ‘elite theory of democracy’.
       This theory struck me as an oxymoron along the lines of round squares or egalitar-
       ian hierarchies. After reading Hugo Drochon’s Elites and Democracy, I have a better
       understanding of the ideas and importance of the main democratic elitists, including
       Gaetano Mosca, Vilfredo Pareto, and Robert Michels. I still think it is wrong to call
       these authors democrats, but anyone who wants to grapple with the challenges of
       establishing participatory democracy in the modern world needs to read these theo-
       rists—ideally, with Drochon’s clear and insightful book as a guide.
         The book tells a history of democratic elitism from the late nineteenth century
       up to the present in three parts. The first is on the classic elite theorists of democ-
       racy including Mosca (1858–1941), Pareto (1848–1923), and Michels (1876–1936).
       Mosca was a Sicilian politician, journalist, and political theorist whose book The
       Ruling Class (1896) argued that all modern societies are ruled by a governing minor-
       ity. Pareto was an economist who wrote a 3,000-page book, Trattato di sociologia
       generale (1916), that identified the ‘circulation of elites’ as the driver of history. Max
       Weber’s student and friend Michels wrote Political Parties (1911) which included a
       famous thesis on the ‘iron law of oligarchy.’         
         According to Drochon, these theorists believed that elites would somehow listen
       to the demos when competing in elections to prevail over rival elites. At the same
       time, scholarly probity compels him to provide ample evidence that these thinkers
       thought that the people could never exercise sovereign power. Here is a representa-
       tive quote from Mosca: ‘When we say that the voters “chose” their representatives,
       we are using a language that is very inexact. The truth is that the representative has
       himself been elected by the voters, and, if that phrase should seem too inflexible
                                                             
         Nicholas Tampio                                     
         tampio@fordham.edu                                  
       1 Fordham University, Bronx, NY 10458, USA            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        22 Page 2 of 4                           N. Tampio   
                                                             
       and too harsh to fit some cases, we might qualify it by saying that his friends have
       had him elected’ (p. 71). Drochon notes that James Burnham called these theorists
       ‘Machiavellians’ (p. 63), and the label sticks if you recall Machiavelli’s observation
       that the most people are duped by the appearance of things and only a few actors
       know the effectual truth. Drochon’s book is filled with interesting details, including
       the fact that Pareto coined the term élites (pp. 101–103), but the question remains:
       why do political scientists call these theorists—including Michels, an eventual sup-
       porter of Mussolini (pp. 138–141)—democrats when they think that elites always do
       and should rule?                                      
         The second part of Drochon’s history is on how the elite theory of democracy
       migrated to the United States and embedded itself in mainstream political science.
       The key figures in this narrative are Joseph Schumpeter (1883–1950), Robert Dahl
       (1915–2014), and C. Wright Mills (1916–1962). Schumpeter’s Capitalism, Socialism
       and Democracy (1942) defined democracy in minimalist terms as a political order
       that selects leaders through elections. On the one hand, Schumpeter provided a way
       for political scientists to operationalize democracy in a mode that still pervades the
       discipline. On the other, Schumpeter dropped Mosca’s and Pareto’s interest in how
       elites prevail in all sectors of society, not just in politics: he ‘made democracy safe
       for capitalism: minimalist democracy was a way to stave off the stronger democratic
       transformations that socialism demanded’ (p. 156). Dahl’s A Preface to Democratic
       Theory (1956) and Mills’ The Power Elite (1956) provided ways for political scien-
       tists and sociologists to study who holds the levers of power in American society.
       Both men agreed that elites governed, but Dahl described American democracy as a
       polyarchy in which elite factions competed for power, and Mills argued that Ameri-
       can elites tended to pass through Ivy League universities and cooperate with one
       another, particularly in crises. Despite their different arguments and temperaments,
       Dahl and Mills maintained that ordinary people hold little power in modern America.
         Drochon provides a genealogy of American political science that explains why a
       course on democratic theory must include a unit on the elite theory of democracy. For
       instance, the Harvard Pareto Seminar, starting in 1932, imbued prominent political
       scientists with ‘a fundamentally elitist view of the world’ (p. 185). Drochon under-
       cuts the democratic bona fides of the protagonists in his book. E.E. Schattschneider
       said that the chorus in Dahl’s pluralist heaven ‘sings with a strong upper-class accent’
       (quoted on p. 25), and Mills, the ostensible founder of the New Left, still wanted intel-
       lectuals like himself to lead ‘educated publics’ (p. 190). Dahl influenced generations
       of students, including Isaac, but his most influential work from the 1950s and 1960s
       did not explain how ordinary people could participate in democratic self-governance.
         The third part of Drochon’s book is his effort to modernize the elite theory of
       democracy in a doctrine he calls ‘dynamic democracy’: ‘democracy must be under-
       stood as the continued challenge to elite rule: that it is in the movement of challenge
       to the established elite by a new elite that change may occur’ (p. 13). Disruptive
       politicians are foxes; conservative politicians are lions; and democracy means an
       energetic circulation of elites that provides more constituencies a (small) role in the
       process. Drochon does not think that the demos may ever vanquish elites, but he does
       think that elite competition for electoral votes can have beneficial consequences for
       the demos. Twice, Drochon quotes Michels retelling the Aesop fable of the sons who

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Elites and democracy                 Page 3 of 4 22   
                                                             
       look for their father’s treasure in the field, thereby improving the soil for crops (pp.
       12, 145). Democracy is an impossible thing to achieve, but striving for it may make
       elites more responsive to the masses—or, maybe more accurately, more likely to
       advance salutary policies for the masses.             
         One theorist has a surprisingly small role in the book: Alexis de Tocqueville
       (1805–1859), author of Democracy in America (1835/1840). Tocqueville agreed
       with Mosca, Pareto, and Michels that ancient Athens or Rousseau’s Swiss cantons
       could not work as models for the modern world. However, Tocqueville argued the
       United States provided a new model for democracy that could proceed without the
       encumbrances of European feudalism. The new world illustrated the dangers and
       possibilities of democracy, and a new political science could steer egalitarian societ-
       ies towards democratic liberty rather than democratic tyranny. Tocqueville wrote in
       French and tried to convince European aristocrats, including his brothers, to appre-
       ciate the possibilities offered, say, by free institutions that gave ordinary people a
       chance to exercise a dollop of power. Elites and Democracy is the history of Euro-
       pean and then American intellectuals who refused Tocqueville’s offer to envision free
       institutions in which ordinary people learn the art of freedom.
         Drochon has performed a valuable service illuminating how European elites
       influenced American political science. He did not need to tell a history that includes
       Thomas Jefferson, Tocqueville, Eugene Debs, Jane Addams, John Dewey, or Mar-
       tin Luther King, Jr., all of whom looked for ways to expand democracy into more
       spheres of life. But Drochon’s book contains many formulations that suggest that the
       elite theorists of democracy were right: ‘democracy is not a sham, but a species of
       elite rule’ (p. 30). This does not make sense to me. Elite rule means that democracy—
       the people (demos) exercising power (cracy)—is a sham. Drochon’s theory might
       more accurately be called open meritocracy or elective aristocracy.
         The streets of Minnesota provide a glimpse of what participatory democracy might
       look like in the modern world:                        
         In what is arguably the most widespread effort in the country to combat Don-
         ald Trump’s severe mass deportation tactics, tens of thousands of Minnesotans
         have played a role in defending their neighbors from ICE [US Immigration and
         Customs Enforcement]. They patrol in their cars and document agents, give
         rides to people who feel unsafe driving, stand outside schools at drop-offs and
         dismissals to protect children and their parents, deliver groceries and supplies
         to families who are staying inside for fear of detention, and crowdfunding legal
         aid or rent (Leingang, 2026).                       
       Democratic elitists could dismiss these protests as ‘fugitive democracy’ or argue that
       they will only influence the state if political entrepreneurs use ICE as a wedge issue
       to win elections. Alternately, democratic theorists and activists could identify and
       promote opportunities to train citizens’ civic muscles so that they are ready to mobi-
       lize when the state undermines civil liberties or civil rights. Democratic elitism is
       a self-fulfilling prophecy if the state, economy, and culture close off opportunities
       for civic agency. But democrats abhor the idea that only people who pass through
       elite universities may make important political decisions. Democracy means ordinary
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        22 Page 4 of 4                           N. Tampio   
                                                             
       people taking to the streets, sharing photos and ideas on social media, and putting
       their bodies on the line to protect their neighbors.  
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Leingang, R. (2026). We’re Fighting for the Soul of the Country: How Minnesota Residents Came
         Together to Face ICE. US News. The Guardian, February 1. h t t p s : / / w w w . t h e g u a r d i a n . c o m / u s - n e w s /
         2 0 2 6 / f e b / 0 1 / m i n n e s o t a - t w i n - c i t i e s - i c e - p r o t e s t s
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             