[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:690–709       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00758-9            
       ARTICLE                                               
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy
       theories                                              
                                                             
                                                             
       Sahar Ghumkhor1 · Liam Gillespie1 · Sean McMorrow1    
                                                             
       Accepted: 21 February 2025 / Published online: 12 April 2025
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
       Abstract                                              
       The proliferation of conspiracy theories is seemingly on the rise. Among them, are
       many that are explicitly racist. Examples of this include Great Replacement Theory,
       White Genocide, QAnon, and Eurabia, which each convey the idea white people
       are being covertly attacked and replaced. In this article, we examine the structure
       of these conspiracy theories and argue that their proliferation in liberal-democratic
       societies is not a coincidence. Our argument is three-fold. First, we argue the pro-
       liferation of racist conspiracy theories in liberal-democratic societies has been ena-
       bled by the racial contract that underpins them. Second, we argue that in these con-
       texts, even conspiracy theories that are seemingly non-racial, can be underpinned by
       structures of race and racialisation. This is because in liberal-democratic contexts,
       the other (who conspires) is always-already racialised, even if racialisation is disa-
       vowed. We therefore argue that the categorisation of conspiracy theories as being
       either ‘racial’ or ‘non-racial’ constitutes a postracial manoeuvre that obscures the
       racialising function of conspiracy theorising in liberal-democratic societies. Finally,
       we argue that the dominant trend of attributing the rise of conspiracy theories to
       the notion we are living in a ‘post-truth era’ obscures the connection between lib-
       eral-democratic societies and racist conspiracy theories, effectively solidifying the
       postracial conceptualisation of both. We argue the ‘post-’ of ‘post-truth’ works to
       sever the past from the present, thereby masking historical continuities of racism
       and depicting conspiracy thinking as a ‘new’ problem stemming from the margins
       of society. By contrast, we argue the phenomenon, and its attendant racism, origi-
       nates from the mainstream of liberal-democratic society.
       Keywords Conspiracy theories · Racism · Postracial · Post-truth · Psychoanalysis ·
       Technology                                            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Extended author information available on the last page of the article
                                                             
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 691
       Introduction                                          
                                                             
                                                             
       A decade ago, Michael Butter wrote that ‘those who are still seriously concerned
       with conspiracy are... both marginalised and in the minority’ (Butter, 2014, p. 290).
       Ten years on, much has changed, and research into conspiracy theories and their
       links to violence and public harm are now a booming industry for security and pol-
       icy analysts, and their counterparts in universities. While still frequently dismissed
       as the irrational obsession of ‘fringe’ elements of society, the prevalence of con-
       spiratorial beliefs and the actions that stem from them are now more commonly
       understood as significant social, cultural, and political phenomena in need of atten-
       tion (Bjerg & Presskorn-Thygesen, 2017). One reason for this shift is the simple fact
       that conspiracy theories—and conspiratorial thinking in general—have increasingly
       ‘moved to occupy a central place in public discourse’ (Horvat, 2021, p. 220). More
       specifically, they have occupied a central place in the public discourse of ‘western’
       liberal-democratic societies, whose social imaginaries are regulated by dominant
       articulations of whiteness (Frankenberg, 1993). Less attention, however, has been
       given to why it is that in these specific contexts conspiracy theories are not only
       flourishing, but have displayed clear tendencies towards extreme action by their pro-
       ponents. In the ensuing article, we offer a detailed consideration of this specificity,
       proposing that the proliferation of conspiracy theories in liberal-democratic societies
       is a product of the racial practices that constitute them.
         Before entering this discussion, it is necessary to clarify how race serves to
       regulate the dominant social imaginary in liberal-democratic contexts. This will
       enable the connection between conspiracy theorising and race to be interrogated.
       We identify the importance of locating race through the continued political work
       of whiteness within these contexts ‘to name what is so invisible to contemporary
       “white” majority societies: the racialised nature of power and privilege’ (Haggis,
       2004, p. 50). This invisibility, Seshadri-Crooks (2000) observes, is powerful pre-
       cisely because of its pre-discursive effects, whereby whiteness both produces and
       naturalises difference—whether of bodies or knowledge. Whiteness therefore con-
       stitutes a naming power that is best discerned indirectly, more so by what it does,
       than by who or what embodies it. Writing in a similar vein, Charles W Mills (2017)
       describes whiteness as ‘a view from nowhere’, that is not called into question, but
       ‘just is’. Whiteness, in these readings, is identified as a structure that discursively
       produces knowledge, truth, and ontologies which come to constitute the domain of
       the so-called universal.                              
         In this article, we will argue that conspiracy theorising in liberal-democratic
       contexts draws from the structure of race and its location in the liberal-democratic
       imaginary. We will propose that conspiracy theorising is a discursive technique that
       is conditioned by the racialising processes of whiteness and, further still, that con-
       spiracy theorising serves to deepen and intensify these processes. This, it will be
       argued, is why conspiracy theories that produce a racialised other as their object
       consistently emerge in liberal-democratic regimes.    
         Contemporary conspiracy theories draw from knowledge that is raced or has
       racial effects. Many explicitly racist theories have entered the mainstream. These

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       692                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       have increasingly been adopted by far-right politicians, organisations, and pro-
       test groups, who deploy and disseminate them as part of their recruitment strate-
       gies and narrative framing. The most commented upon examples include Great
       Replacement Theory (GRT), White Genocide, QAnon, Eurabia, and the Trojan
       Horse Affair, each of which posits the existence of a racialised threat that is con-
       spiring against the white liberal nation. These conspiracy theories have been
       explicitly invoked as the rationale for white supremacist violence, including the
       actions of white nationalists such as Anders Brevik and Brenton Tarrant, and par-
       ticipants of the Charlottesville and Unite the Right riots of 2017, and the Capitol
       Hill Riots of 6 January 2021. In these examples, those who engaged in violence
       drew not only from explicitly racialised conspiracy theories, but so too from the
       structures of race that constitute their respective liberal-democratic regimes.
       While it is important to consider the specificities of the social and historical con-
       texts in which such events occur—i.e. those related to the events above—cru-
       cially it is also important to recognise what allows these contexts to influence and
       inform one another via their discursive rationales for political action. This, we
       will contend, is the consistency of whiteness that constitutes the racialised struc-
       ture that underpins liberal-democratic regimes.       
         It is also important to note that not all conspiracy theories present clear signs of a
       race agenda. Seemingly non-racial conspiracy theories have proliferated throughout
       liberal-democratic societies as well, both in tandem with, and sometimes seemingly
       apart from, those which are explicitly race-related. Examples of this include con-
       spiracy theories associated with Covid-19, such as those relating to the origins of
       the virus, as well as to the various measures that were implemented to combat its
       spread, including vaccines, lockdowns, and movement restrictions. Other examples
       include conspiracy theories associated with the 5G network, 15-min cities, climate
       change, and the curvature of the earth, or lack thereof (Ahmed et al., 2020; Buarque,
       2022; Jolley & Paterson, 2020). Such conspiracy theories, perhaps because they
       seem more palatable compared to those that explicitly invoke race, have spread well
       beyond the far-right networks within which they are popular. Indeed, a prevalent
       explanation contextualises their proliferation with respect to the many crises cur-
       rently faced by liberal-democratic regimes, especially in relation to the ostensibly
       never-ending globalisation of capitalism.             
         With this in mind, it is important that the recent surge of white nationalism and
       both racial- and seemingly non-racial conspiracy theories are not assumed to be
       merely a matter of coincidence. Instead, the psychosocial and epistemological foun-
       dations that have allowed political actors to both mobilise and be mobilised by con-
       spiracy theories should be carefully considered. This article seeks to do just this.
         The main issue we will examine will be the relation between racial and non-racial
       conspiracy theories. In doing so, we propose that the whiteness that is inherent to
       liberal-democratic regimes orients the articulation of both types of conspiracy theo-
       ries. To demonstrate this, we draw on psychoanalytic theory to problematise the role
       paranoia is commonly thought to play in the proliferation of conspiracy theories. We
       will propose that a Lacanian reading of paranoia both depathologises paranoia and
       reveals the liberal-democratic subject’s investment in knowing as one that is always
       paranoid because true knowledge can never be secured. 

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 693
                                                             
         Our argument is that the investment in knowing what conspiratorial thinking
       depends on will work to rescue the liberal subject from the failure of knowledge by
       positing the existence of an other who stands in the way. We argue that in the con-
       text of liberal-democratic societies, this other is necessarily a racialised other insofar
       as these contexts are discursively structured in reference to whiteness. We argue the
       racial structure of this fantasy works to shield the subject who identifies with it from
       the instability of knowledge, and moreover, that this structure exists irrespective of
       whether or not the specific conspiracy theory in question explicitly names a racial-
       ised other as such.                                   
         After proposing our position, we then address the growing claim in the litera-
       ture on conspiracy theories that their contemporary proliferation has been caused by
       a shift to a post-truth era in liberal-democratic societies. We address this claim by
       tracing how the conception of post-truth is complicit with a liberal impulse to cover
       up the structures of race and racial animus which govern prevailing social antago-
       nisms in liberal-democratic societies. We will argue that the post-truth discourse on
       conspiracy theories masks these structures by invoking another dominant articula-
       tion of the liberal-democratic imaginary, namely, that of techno-rationality. Accord-
       ing to this perspective, explanations of social phenomena and the solutions to them
       are increasingly attributed to the technical structures of knowledge. This is evident
       in much of the emerging conspiracy theory literature, which seeks to definitionally
       isolate specific conspiracy theories while mechanistically explaining their spread
       (for examples, see: Ahmed et al., 2020; Buarque, 2022; Jolley & Paterson, 2020).
       A major implication of such explanations, however, is that they obscure the func-
       tion that such phenomena fulfil. Resisting this, we argue that the techno-rationalist
       post-truth explanation for the rise of conspiracy theories inadvertently obscures their
       racial function by reproducing a ‘postracial’ onto-epistemology that renders invis-
       ible the racial contract liberalism establishes with its subjects (Mills, 2014). This
       is because the ‘post’ of the post-truth explanation works to sever the past from the
       present (Mejia et al. 2018) by characterising the proliferation of conspiracy theories
       as a contemporary expression of the racist margins of society, rather than as a con-
       tinuation of the whiteness upon which liberal-democratic society itself is predicated.
       A psychoanalytic approach to the racialised dimension of conspiracy
       theories                                              
       Racialisation and its racism                          
                                                             
       What, then, is the relation of race to liberalism? Or to be more direct, how are race
       and racialisation structured and located within the dominant social imaginary of
       liberal-democratic regimes? A brief and classic answer lies in the foundational doc-
       trine of liberal neutrality. This doctrine holds that there should be no discrimination
       between self and other. In fact, the other is to be recognised as another self, an equal
       individual within a community of equals. The structures of race, however, involve
       an exploitation of this doctrine that rests on a division between nature and culture.
       It is held that ‘radical differences between individuals belong to the state of nature:
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 5]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       694                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       racial, sexual, ethnic, and other such differences are to be rooted in “first” nature,
       while religious, cultural, and philosophical differences are to be rooted in “second
       nature” (Vatter, 2004, p. 167). The implication being that these differences become
       neutralised and excluded by a doctrine that places individuals on equal terms strictly
       on the basis of characteristics deemed befitting of the normative conditions of cul-
       ture (a second nature defined, obviously, in terms negotiated via the dominant social
       imaginary). The point for our analysis here is that this principle of liberalism por-
       trays the differentiation of race as neutralised and excluded from the categories of
       liberal-democratic culture, therefore drawing ambiguity around the treatment of
       racialised others as another self.                    
         Challenging liberalism’s claims of neutrality and the promotion of values like
       equality and inclusion, critics have pointed to liberalism’s reliance upon practices
       of exclusion from its very inception. Mills (2014), for example, argues that liberal-
       democratic culture is built on a ‘racial contract’ that is foundational to liberalism,
       and predicated on exclusion. Further, far from expanding freedom(s), liberalism
       has weaponised its ostensible virtues against others by policing their (alleged) rela-
       tion to liberalism as a racialised practice (Asad, 2003; Losurdo, 2011). As Losurdo
       observes (2011), the history of liberalism has not so much been one of expanding
       freedoms, but rather, of policing and disciplining them. The implication of this is
       that the differentiation of racial norms is excluded from the characteristics of onto-
       logical equality or a way of social being (Mills, 2014).
         Here, we could think of attempts within liberal-democratic regimes to address
       race through policies of assimilation with multicultural characteristics. What is most
       significant about this is that the liberal-democratic imaginary does the work of both
       producing and neutralising race simultaneously. When the individual of liberal cul-
       ture, with its essential contiguity to power (i.e. law) and privilege (i.e. equality), is
       structured through norms attributed to whiteness, the liberal-democratic imaginary
       inevitably produces it’s racialised other in a relation of exclusion.
         While it is evident that whiteness has maintained a dominant position in the
       social imaginary of liberal-democratic societies—what Mills refers to as ‘racial
       liberalism’ (2008)—there has nevertheless also been a considerable renegotiation
       of racial exclusion therein. Indeed, in many ways, we have seen the reversal of the
       political neutralisation of race in liberal societies. However, the practices through
       which race and racialisation produce difference in these contexts have also been
       masked and disavowed in other ways. This has led to the deepening of the uncon-
       scious production of the racialised other in liberal contexts, which becomes primed
       for symptomatic articulation when the norms of liberal-democratic culture are seen
       to be in crisis.                                      
         The unconscious production of the racialised other seemingly points to a repres-
       sion of the processes of racialisation from which it is drawn; moreover, it is through
       this repression that the liberal-democratic imaginary generates for itself a discursive
       veil of a ‘racism without racists’ (Bonilla-Silva, 2015). This repression produces the
       ‘postracial’ (Goldberg, 2015). The implication of this is that when liberal-demo-
       cratic culture is perceived to be in crisis, there is what could be considered a ‘return
       of the repressed’, which can manifest via a symptomatic articulation of the racialised
       other. While we will later link conspiracy thinking to the postracial production of

[PAGE 6]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 695
                                                             
       racialised others—and the colour-blindness that disavows its structural embedded-
       ness—it is first necessary to provide a clearer account of how these conditions lead
       to racialised expressions.                            
         Much can be gained by looking at this question from a psychoanalytic perspec-
       tive. Psychoanalytic theory is particularly helpful for explaining how discourse
       serves to deepen and intensify racialisation, while revealing links between implicit
       and explicit forms of racism. This will be crucial for our analysis because it will
       allow us to interrogate the links between ostensibly non-racial and racial conspiracy
       theories in liberal-democratic contexts, and the passage from the former to the latter.
       Conspiratorial thinking and its other                 
                                                             
       It is through this passage from ‘non-racial’ to ‘racial’ discourse, replete with its
       mechanisms of othering and disavowal, that we position our analysis of the contem-
       porary proliferation of conspiracy theories in liberal-democratic societies. We will
       provide a psychoanalytic explanation of the phenomenon to identify how the racial-
       ised other is structured within conspiratorial thinking as it circulates within a racial
       economy of lack. To do so, it is useful to draw from Lacanian psychoanalysis, such
       as Alenka Zupančič’s account of conspiracy theories, in which she characterises the
       ‘march of conspiracy theories from the social margins to its centre’ as being driven
       by two interrelated transformations (2022, p. 234).   
         Firstly, attention should be directed to transformations of the communal dimen-
       sion of these societies, which involves a shifting configuration of social relations
       commonly understood to be an effect of a developing capitalist system. As Zupančič
       elaborates, the ‘social relations in late capitalism are excessively fictionalised, in
       order for the reality of capital to be able to follow its course’ (2022, p. 235). Fol-
       lowing on from this transformation is a dissolution of grand narratives concerning
       institutional power, which is particularly pertinent when considering the declining
       role of political ideologies that had previously reinforced liberal-democratic regimes
       in the twentieth century. This has deep consequences for people’s capacity to explain
       their experience of social reality, leading to ‘the dissolution of the “public” as a
       general or common platform that has long played the role of the shared big Other’
       (Zupančič, 2022, p. 235). Replacing the function of the public, Zupančič argues, are
       ‘particularised and privatised truths’ (2022, p. 235). On this basis, we propose that
       the contemporary proliferation of conspiratorial thinking is a response to the inten-
       sifying crises of liberal-democratic regimes and their ‘excessive fictionalisation’ of
       social reality, leading to a drive towards knowledge that can explain the subject’s
       social experience and restore its communal dimensions.
         The essential argument proposed by Zupančič is that conspiratorial thinking
       involves the reproduction of a ‘big Other’ that can make sense of what is not vis-
       ible within social experience—an object that in itself becomes a source of knowl-
       edge about institutional power. This approach is significant for the reason that it
       pushes the analysis further than mere sociological explanations by showing that ‘the
       firmness of [the] conviction or belief [of conspiracy theorists] springs from what is
       unconscious in the psychoanalytic sense of the term’ (Zupančič, 2022, p. 246).
                                                             

[PAGE 7]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       696                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
         This presents an essential question for our analysis: How is the conspiratorial
       formation of the other informed by race? We can begin to answer this question
       by considering Zupančič’s claim that the other is configured through what Lacan
       has referred to as the enigma of ‘unconscious knowledge’: that is, ‘knowledge that
       doesn’t know itself’ (Fink, 1995; Lacan, 2006). Zupančič observes that proponents
       of conspiratorial thinking often seem to exhibit the effects of ‘unconscious knowl-
       edge’ insofar as ‘it is as if, from the very outset, [conspiracy theory] supporters knew
       without knowing, without knowing that they know’ (2022, p. 245). For Zupančič,
       this not only explains the deep investment conspiracy theorists have in the formation
       of the conspiratorial ‘big Other’, but also the intensity and zeal they display when
       deciphering the knowledge contained in their fictionalised secret—such as when, in
       the common idiom, ‘they do their own research’ (Zupančič, 2022, p. 244) to find the
       ‘real truth’, or what Lacan calls, ‘a little piece of the real’ (Zupančič, 2022, p. 234;
       see also Lacan & Miller, 2018; Fink, 1995).           
         It is in reference to these fragments of ‘reality’ that we identify a connection to
       race thinking. This is because it is from the experience of an already-racialised real-
       ity—à la Mills’ racial contract (2014)—that the enigma of the other who conspires
       against the subject is drawn. This partly explains why so many explicitly racist con-
       spiracy theories—such as GRT, White Genocide, QAnon and Trojan Horse—have
       emerged in liberal-democratic contexts not only recently in the so-called post-truth
       era, but also historically as well.                   
         However, our argument that the ostensibly non-racial conspiracy theories cur-
       rently proliferating in liberal-democratic societies can also assume a racialised struc-
       ture requires an even deeper level of clarification. This is particularly the case with
       respect to the formation of the racialised other. Here, Zupančič again offers a way
       forward by identifying that regardless of the differing content of conspiracy theo-
       ries, they nevertheless share a ‘fantasmatic structure’ in which a conspiratorial other
       steals the subject’s enjoyment or enjoys at their expense (2022, p. 247). Moreover,
       it is through this very enjoyment that the conspiratorial other comes to embody a
       ‘quintessential Foreignness with respect to [the subject]’ (Zupančič, 2022, p. 247).
       Thus, we propose that regardless of the explicit content of any particular conspir-
       acy theory—be it White Genocide or the threat of 15-minute cities—an ‘other’ who
       enjoys in the subject’s place, and is therefore racialised by way of being an external
       or foreign intrusion, can always potentially be to blame. The unconscious knowledge
       of what otherness means for the subject is therefore invoked in paranoid terms. To
       demonstrate this thesis, we will now turn to examine the critical role of paranoia—
       which we understand in psychoanalytic, rather than popular cultural terms—more
       closely. Once established, this will allow us to analyse how the post-truth discourse
       works to obscure the workings of race that give rise to conspiratorial thinking in the
       first instance.                                       
       Paranoid knowledge                                    
       What differentiates conspiracy theories and conspiracy theory beliefs from other
       forms of knowledge? And is it even productive to differentiate them? The established
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 8]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 697
                                                             
       literature on conspiracy theories invokes popular notions of paranoia to distinguish
       conspiracy theory beliefs from those which are regularly held and are thus deemed
       to be normal (for an overview, see: Jane & Fleming, 2014). On this view, conspiracy
       beliefs are portrayed as an enemy of rationality and Enlightenment values, which
       are valorised (Jane & Fleming, 2014). Consequently, conspiracy theories and disin-
       formation are commonly understood as being uniquely threatening to liberal-demo-
       cratic societies insofar as they seem to strike at the heart of liberal-democratic val-
       ues, such as a commitment to truth, rationality, transparency, and so on (Bennett &
       Livingston, 2023; Tripodi, 2022). On this understanding, conspiracy theories pose
       a ‘threat…to healthy democratic practice’ (Freelon & Wells, 2020, p. 146) because
       they disrupt the ability of democratic societies ‘to articulate and resolve political dif-
       ferences through reasoned debate based on evidence’ (Bennett & Livingston, 2023,
       p. 4). This has led to what some have called a ‘crisis of the public sphere’ (Horvat,
       2021). However, as we will later elaborate, this seemingly innocuous conceptualisa-
       tion already contains a racialised dimension, which is that conspiracy theories can
       only be thought to pose a unique threat to liberal-democratic regimes insofar as lib-
       eral-democratic regimes are also imagined as being uniquely rational. We will return
       to this aspect shortly. First, however, it is necessary to point out that the pathologisa-
       tion of conspiracy theories and disinformation labours under its own belief in the
       existence of knowledge that is ordinary, and thus immune to, or free of, paranoia. By
       contrast, in psychoanalytic theory, paranoia itself is not necessarily pathological, nor
       something that can be avoided; rather, as we explain below, it is a symptom (if not
       condition) of knowledge itself as such (Mills, 2003). 
         For Lacan, the subject of language must draw upon the Symbolic Order to articu-
       late its presumed identity (2006, p. 690). However, insofar as language precedes and
       exceeds the subject, it does not belong to the subject, but instead to the big Other. As
       such, the Symbolic fails to properly capture the subject’s experiences and ostensibly
       unique identity. For Lacan, this manifests in a paradox: Language necessarily fails,
       and yet the subject remains reliant upon language to articulate itself.
         The subject can respond to the failure of the Symbolic Order, and therefore
       knowledge, in several ways. The most common is neurosis, which entails a quest for
       the right signifier that would correspond to the subject and make the subject whole.
       This quest is perpetual because, as Yannis Stavrakakis explains, ‘there is no signi-
       fied or transcendental signifier to hold together signification, guaranteeing its coher-
       ence and fullness’ (1999, p .46). An alternative response is to refuse the rules of the
       Symbolic Other—a position Lacan calls psychosis—which entails a turn towards
       imaginary identification(as opposed to Symbolic identification). These ‘other’ imag-
       inary identifications revolve around the paranoia that an other is to blame for steal-
       ing something in the Other one once had.              
         Importantly for Lacan, paranoia is not simply that which defines the psychotic
       subject. Rather, all subjects are paranoid because they are marked by their encounter
       with the desire of others. As Jon Mills further explains:
         Others hurt us with their knowledge, with what they say, as do we. And we
         hurt knowing. ‘What will the Other do next?’ We are both pacified yet cower in
         extreme trembling over what we may and may not know – what we may and may

[PAGE 9]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       698                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
         not find out; and this is why our relation to knowledge is fundamentally para-
         noiac. (2003, p. 32)                                
         The subject’s reliance upon a language that necessarily fails leads it to believe there
       is always more hiding behind the scene: that something is either missing, or is even
       being actively concealed, à la Zupančič’s account of the other who steals and secretly
       enjoys (2022, p. 247). Knowledge therefore ‘torments, persecutes, [and] cuts’ the sub-
       ject even as it enables desire (Mills, 2003, p. 33). The pursuit of knowledge encom-
       passes this cutting effect, and paranoia is thus less a pathology than a condition of
       becoming a subject.                                   
         The affective and paranoid investments that mark subject-knowledge relations pose
       problems for the way the term conspiracy theory is conventionally deployed, including
       in conspiracy theory and disinformation research. First, it assumes knowledge can be
       total, and that the desire for truth can be guaranteed, if not fulfilled. This trend is encap-
       sulated, for example, by Bennett and Livingston’s claim that we are in the midst of a
       ‘disinformation disorder’ that has compromised ‘the legitimacy of authoritative institu-
       tions’, and their ability to ‘anchor public debate in a mix of competing political goals
       and values, authoritative evidence claims, and norms and processes for communicating
       and resolving disagreements’ (2023, p. 4; our emphasis). Second, insofar as the term
       conspiracy theory purports to distinguish ordinary knowledge from knowledge that
       is specifically paranoid and conspiratorial, it generates a binary between supposedly
       non-paranoid, mundane knowledge, and that which is supposedly uniquely paranoid
       and pathological. To this end, the term conspiracy theory functions performatively and
       ideologically to deem some knowledge as pathological, while simultaneously securing
       other knowledge as mundane.                           
         In effect, the designation effectuates a splitting whereby conspiracy theories are
       set apart as an unintelligible and pathological form of knowledge, while the stability
       and neutrality of ordinary knowledge is reinforced as a normative standard. A flow-on
       effect of this conservative manoeuvre, of course, is that some subjects are designated
       as pathological (i.e. those who subscribe to conspiracy theories), while others are not.
       However, if all knowledge is paranoid—that is, remains plagued by the question of
       the Other—then the binary between the mundane and the pathological is spurious and
       unstable; and more than this, so too the category of ordinary knowledge itself remains
       volatile.                                             
         In the section that follows, we will elucidate the mechanisms through which con-
       spiracy theories attempt to suture the volatility of knowledge via the fantasy of race.
       We will argue that insofar as the other of liberal-democratic societies is always-already
       racialised, the fantasy of race can perform this function even when the conspiracy the-
       ory in question seems, at least superficially, to be non-racial. We will thereby contend
       that the categorisation of conspiracy theories as such can constitute a postracial strategy
       that further conceals unconscious knowledge of race.  
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 10]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 699
       The racial logics of ‘Non‑Racial’ conspiracies        
                                                             
                                                             
       As outlined above, insofar as popular and academic understandings work to pathol-
       ogise conspiracy theories, they foreclose the need for a deeper analysis of what
       conspiracy theories offer the subject beyond specifically articulated extreme preoc-
       cupations. However, we have argued that in the light of Lacan’s formulations, the
       distinction between paranoid pathological knowledge and non-paranoid ordinary
       knowledge rests on unstable footing, because all knowledge is necessarily riddled
       with paranoia, and the fantasy of complete knowledge is impossible. In this section,
       we trace a further split that is typically effectuated in terms of the way conspiracy
       theories are categorised in both popular understandings and emerging conspiracy
       theory literature: that of being either racial or non-racial. Our argument will be that
       the distinction effectuates a postracial manoeuvre that masks the modes of raciali-
       sation at work even in ostensibly non-racial conspiratorial thinking. The section
       will begin by first introducing the postracial. We will then discuss several exam-
       ples of contemporary conspiracy theories, revealing how they are underpinned by
       modes and structures of race and racialisation despite appearing, at first gloss, to be
       non-racial.                                           
         The term postracial gained traction during the years of Barack Obama’s presi-
       dency, which many interpreted as a signal the United States had moved on from its
       racial past. In a singular moment, past grievances were supposedly either suspended,
       soothed or overcome, and an allegedly postracial era began. This reading has worked
       to mythologise liberal-democratic regimes by obscuring the ongoing realities of rac-
       ism (Ono, 2010), and in our psychoanalytic reading, it identifies a liberal fantasy
       of freedom that represses historical experience by neutralising race. Seeing through
       this, however, scholars of racism have identified new racisms (Bonilla-Silva, 2015)
       that operate via a political strategy (Ono, 2010) of racism without race (Goldberg,
       2015). Goldberg (2015) characterises this mode of conceptualising racism as a depo-
       liticised, neo-liberal strategy that circumscribes racism by articulating it in terms of
       individualised irruptions. This frames racism as behaviour, rather than an expression
       of broader institutional practices (Lentin & Titley, 2011; Mills, 2008, 2014; Morsi,
       2017). Effectively this obscures what Mills identifies as the social ontology of race,
       which produces social reality and a hierarchical system (2008, p. 1388).
         Insofar as it draws our focus away from the social ontology of race, the postracial
       creates what Barnor Hesse calls the postracial horizon (2011). In effect, the postra-
       cial invisibilises the racial contract while allowing it to remain fully operable (Mills,
       2014). This horizon, we add, requires a deeper fantasy of liberal equality and free-
       dom that covers over the workings of race while its harms are compounded through
       practices that split off the vulnerable citizen and the conspiratorial other. Our pur-
       pose in invoking this understanding is not to make the concept of the postracial do
       heavy lifting, as Valluvan (2016) has well cautioned. Rather, we identify in it a fan-
       tasmatic structure that calls attention to the often-invisible inscription of the racial
       contract (as unconscious knowledge) in our social and cultural worlds, so that we
       might then illuminate how non-racial conspiracy theories can nevertheless be made
       to do the work of racism.                             

[PAGE 11]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       700                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
         The postracial can be traced in relation to conspiracy theories in two ways.
       First, to follow on from Dean’s (2002) observations about conspiracy theories as
       ‘a way of doing politics’, we can interpret the relegation of conspiracy theories to
       the margins and so-called extreme as a manoeuvre that reproduces the progres-
       sive myth of the postracial by divorcing conspiracy theories from the mainstream
       of society. This distances conspiracy theories and their inherent paranoia from
       ordinary knowledge and public discourse, which are supposedly non-paranoid.
       This manoeuvre constructs conspiracy theories, paranoia, and racism as phenom-
       ena that are inconsistent with society’s centre and are therefore either less worthy
       of serious examination, or can be examined in isolation, without implicating the
       already-racialised liberal-democratic contexts in which conspiracy theories have
       thrived.                                              
         Secondly, as foreshadowed above, we suggest that the problematic split between
       paranoid and non-paranoid knowledge is reproduced via the categorisation of con-
       spiracy theories as being either racial or non-racial: a binarisation we will character-
       ise as an expression of the postracial horizon that masks the modes of racialisation
       that structure liberal-democratic societies (à la whiteness). We will now turn to this
       point by considering the structural affinity between multiple well-known conspiracy
       theories that are often isolated from one another by being separated out into such
       categories.                                           
         Throughout the Covid-19 pandemic, far-right groups pushed a range of conspir-
       acy theories (Ahmed et al., 2020; Biddlestone et al., 2020; Buarque, 2022; Dolan,
       2020; Jolley & Paterson, 2020). Many of these explicitly evoked racism, such as
       GRT, White Genocide, QAnon, and Eurabia. The same networks also featured a
       range of conspiracy theories conventionally understood as being unrelated to rac-
       ism. Examples include conspiracy theories about Covid-19, such as whether it was
       a biological weapon or a hoax; conspiracy theories about Covid-19 health meas-
       ures, such as the vaccine, lockdowns, and movement restrictions; and conspiracy
       theories about various phenomena, such as the 5G network, 15-minute cities, and
       climate change. Existing analyses have highlighted the way these non-racial con-
       spiracy theories have been deployed to advance racist ideologies. Mobashra Taza-
       mal (2020) observes, for example, that many Covid-19 conspiracy theories incorpo-
       rated Islamophobia, such as by ‘alleging…Muslims were responsible for the spread
       of Covid-19’ through migration, religious observance, and having larger families.
       Such ideas allude to GRT and White Genocide, which are underpinned by the anxi-
       ety that white people are being replaced by ‘high breeding’ migrants. The Muslim
       subject that is consistent across these allusions is an Islamophobic fantasy structured
       precisely through the mechanism of the racialised other, which in itself is already
       constituted within these liberal-democratic contexts to serve as a ‘big Other’ when
       symptomatic responses to crises are triggered. In a similar vein, members of QAnon
       claimed Covid-19 health measures were part of a ‘secret plan orchestrated by Mus-
       lims’ to control the nation by ‘[bringing] Sharia law to the United States by way
       of coronavirus restrictions’ (Khalel, 2020). Some labelled Covid-19 ‘the Chinese
       virus’, and alluded to historical anxieties about ‘the yellow peril’, leading to a surge
       in anti-Asian racism in both public spaces and on social media (Viala-Gaudefroy &
       Lindaman, 2020).                                      

[PAGE 12]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 701
                                                             
         While these observations regarding the intersection of racial and supposedly
       non-racial conspiracy theories are important, our intention is to take such analyses
       further. Our central claim is that conspiracy theories cannot simply be categorised
       as either racial or non-racial. Such a split would only lead to an interpretation of
       the above phenomena as one through which ‘originally’ non-racial conspiracy theo-
       ries come to be deployed alongside racial conspiracy theories so that the former can
       serve a racialising function that they previously did not have. By contrast, we instead
       claim that in the context of the liberal-democratic imaginary, which is dominated
       by a defence of whiteness, conspiracy theories always-already operate via racial-
       ised logics insofar as they necessarily posit the existence of an other who is always-
       already racialised by the very conditions by which it is made other. In other words,
       race does not just return in the above examples, but rather, structures experiences
       of the threat to public health from the outset. This means that in the liberal-demo-
       cratic imaginary, conspiracy theories are primed as vectors of racism regardless of
       the form or content they might assume, and the motives for which they are deployed.
         To understand why even seemingly non-racial conspiracy theories can have a
       racialised structure, it is important to understand how the racial contract has come to
       be postracially depicted. In dominant narratives, the privileges once enjoyed by the
       white subject—coded into the liberal subject—have been eroded in recent decades.
       These privileges have allegedly been lost on several fronts, including to globalisa-
       tion (qua capitalism); mass migration and multiple refugee crises; Muslims and
       Islam; Indigenous populations, including via treaties, native title, and land acknowl-
       edgements; as well as to other cultural forces and trends, such as multiculturalism
       and political correctness. While contemporary racist conspiracy theories such as
       GRT, White Genocide, QAnon, and ‘Chinese virus’, directly tap into these anxieties
       of loss, so too we argue do ostensibly non-racial conspiracy theories. This is because
       the narrative of loss can, and in liberal-democratic societies frequently does, assume
       racialised dimensions. This is apparent, for example, in the aforementioned conspir-
       acy theories about Covid-19, the 5G network, 15-minute cities, and climate change.
       While such conspiracy theories are frequently understood as being unrelated to race
       and racism, their recurring theme of loss should prompt the question, ‘to whom is
       freedom supposedly being lost?’, or, ‘who is being blamed for taking our freedom?’
         While this conceptual binarisation obscures race and the modes of racialisation
       at work in allegedly non-racial conspiracies, it also obscures the connection between
       both categories. To illustrate why, we will briefly use the Medical Apartheid con-
       spiracy theory, which circulated in relation to Covid-19 health measures, as an
       example. When lockdowns, movement restrictions, mask-mandates, vaccine require-
       ments, and vaccine passports emerged to curtail the virus, the measures were imme-
       diately grouped together under the phrase Medical Apartheid and incorporated into
       existing anxieties about the slow but steady erosion of freedom in liberal-democratic
       societies (Gillespie & Ghumkhor, 2024). Adherents portrayed Medical Apartheid,
       and the health measures that constituted it, as a continuation of the State’s desire to
       erode the liberal freedom of those deemed to be most (rightfully) in possession of it.
         While at first blush, this reading may not appear to contain a racial dimen-
       sion, in the light of Mills’ arguments about the racial contract (2014) and racial
       liberalism (2008, 2017), its racial contours become more evident, and liberal

[PAGE 13]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       702                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       freedom is unmasked as white freedom (Stovall, 2021). This articulates with
       Sunera Thobani’s (2007) argument that it is through whiteness that subjects
       become the exalted subjects of the nation, who can imagine themselves in pos-
       session of, and as ideal candidates for, liberal freedom. In reference to this cov-
       ert whiteness,                                        
         Gillespie and Ghumkhor (2024) have identified the workings of race within
       Covid-19 conspiracy theories that portray freedom in crisis. While these con-
       spiracy theories appeared to bind adherents together through a shared sense of
       loss—that of their freedom—they found a familiar racialised paranoia at work
       that depicted the other as conspiring to steal freedom from the exalted (white)
       subject. Given this relationship between freedom and whiteness, it should there-
       fore come as no surprise that Covid-19 conspiracy theorists gave a racially
       charged name to the alleged cause of their lost freedom, namely, Medical
       Apartheid.                                            
         Race (coded in the use of apartheid) attempts to fulfil the fantasy of knowl-
       edge (of the medical field, science) through the experience of being denied
       access to it by a loss of freedom from public health measures. This fulfilment
       requires an other that is functionally perceived as an external intrusion. In
       other words, the other onto which loss, threat, danger, anger, resentment, envy,
       and jealousy are projected is already a racialised structure that mobilises an
       unconscious knowledge of what otherness marks (conspiring to take our free-
       dom, brings about our destruction, cultural contamination, and so on). While
       the process of racialising the other manifests in the paranoia of being replaced
       by migrants or Muslims (etc.), thereby causing ‘white genocide’, so too, it also
       manifests in the reaction to the equalising effects of supposedly non-racial con-
       spiracy theories, which effectively make everyone foreign insofar as they are
       portrayed as racialised subjects of unfreedom. Put more directly, we can thus see
       how racial anxieties about replacement are both detectable in, and (re)iterated
       via, Covid-19 conspiracies.                           
         The above example demonstrates that the underlying logic of conspiracy the-
       ories can be racialised even if the alleged conspirator is not explicitly named as
       a racialised other. While they are clearly different in terms of their content, both
       types of conspiracy work to explain the lack in the subject of (racial) liberalism
       as that which results from an other who conspires to steal and erode its freedom.
       The racialisation of freedom in liberal-democratic contexts therefore problema-
       tises the conceptual separation of supposedly racial and non-racial conspiracy
       theories, revealing this cordoning off as a postracial manoeuvre. Our argument
       thus goes well beyond the claim that racial and non-racial conspiracy theories
       can merely be invoked together. Instead, we have argued that even when operat-
       ing alone, seemingly non-racial conspiracy theories can reinforce narratives of
       (white) loss by assuming the guise of the postracial. 
         With the first two parts of our argument thus far established, we now turn to
       the final part, which is that the postracial impulse for conceptualising the prolif-
       eration of conspiracy theories in liberal-democratic contexts reaches its zenith in
       the growing notion that we are living in a post-truth era.

[PAGE 14]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 703
       Postracial post‑truths                                
                                                             
                                                             
       At the turn of the twenty-first century, Jodi Dean (2002) reflected on the growth
       of information technologies. While noting they had brought previously unimagined
       levels of information accessibility to some, she wondered whether this accessibility
       could be experienced as an exposure to information that might itself become too
       much to bear. This is because the information age that proliferates data also pro-
       liferates the impression that there is always more to know, and that everything is
       connected. This serves as a constant reminder that ‘things are not as they seem’,
       paradoxically generating the ‘guiding [impulse]’ for conspiratorial thinking (Dean,
       2002, p. 48). For Dean, this impulse is fundamentally paranoid because it leads the
       subject to search for a truth that has been withheld—a process that entails sifting
       through masses of information to uncover hidden knowledge (the secret) with the
       hope of finally arriving at the ‘real’ truth.         
         While Dean wrote about this at the turn of the millennium, since that time, the
       trends she identified have only exacerbated. Indeed, information and information
       technologies have continued to proliferate at such speed that we have now ironically
       entered what many are calling a post-truth era, both in public discourse (Anderson &
       Raine, 2017; Enfield, 2017; Kakutani, 2018) and in academic literature (Ahlstrom-
       Vij, 2023; McIntyre, 2018; Pond, 2020). Such proclamations have grown louder
       with the rise (and now return) of Trumpism, and its attendant accusations of fake
       news and invocation of ‘alternative facts’. Indeed, post-truth was declared ‘word
       of the year’ by the Oxford English Dictionary on 11 December 2016 (Anderson &
       Raine, 2017). This notion of truth in crisis or some kind of knowledge fragmen-
       tation is frequently called upon to explain the proliferation of conspiracy thinking
       in liberal-democratic societies. In this section, however, we will problematise this
       characterisation by taking up Jason David Myers’ insistence that we ask: ‘what is
       one doing when one utters the words “post-truth”?’ (2018). In heeding this call, we
       argue that the post-truth discourse constitutes a further move towards the postracial
       insofar as it temporalises and circumscribes conspiracy thinking in a way that masks
       whiteness and historical continuities of racism.      
         The post-truth era is often portrayed as emerging, or at least rising to promi-
       nence, around the time of Donald Trump’s 2016 presidential election. Despite being
       embroiled in near-constant controversies, lies, denials, and distortions, including
       the Trump campaign’s oppositional discourse to ‘mainstream media’, ‘elites’, and
       ‘the liberal establishment’, Trump’s popularity soared, spurring an entire social
       movement. At the same time, a range of technologies capable of rapidly spreading
       mis- and disinformation proliferated. For those who subscribe to the post-truth dis-
       course, this has led to the erosion of knowledge and the public sphere via two paral-
       lel processes.                                        
         First is a growing suspicion of received knowledge (especially that which
       stems from those Trump has labelled intellectual elites). Second, occurring
       simultaneously, is the public’s alleged disinvestment in truth as a priority (Farkas
       & Schou, 2019; Pond, 2020). Writing in this vein, Phillip Pond (2020) frames the
       post-truth problem as one of complexity, where reality is increasingly mediated

[PAGE 15]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       704                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       by digital technologies and systems of interactions. As a consequence, Pond sug-
       gests, people care less about the truth than they previously did, and so we must
       ask: ‘why does nobody know anything anymore?’ In what follows, however, we
       will both challenge the thesis that nobody cares nor knows anything anymore,
       while also arguing that the epistemology of truth upon which Pond’s question
       rests requires closer investigation.                  
         The notion that conspiracy theories and the belief in alternative facts have
       taken off due to the inauguration of a post-truth era is quickly troubled by an
       analysis of the epistemological function of conspiracy theories. This is because,
       although the term post-truth is increasingly deployed, when examining conspir-
       acy theories, it is clear that adherents are not opposed to truth per se (Hannon
       2023). On the contrary, they tend to be deeply committed to finding a truth that is
       ‘out there’ but has been withheld (Dean, 2002).       
         With this in mind, Stef Aupers (2012) maintains that despite first appearances,
       conspiracy theorising is not an aberration of modernity and liberal ideals, which
       is typically understood as prioritising reason, rationality, and the constant pursuit
       of technological and scientific progress. This is because for Aupers, the liberal
       pursuit creates a constant reminder that knowledge is never complete and is sub-
       ject to change at any time. Paradoxically then, the commitment to the pursuit of
       knowledge can be experienced as destabilising, leading to the emergence of con-
       spiracy cultures that facilitate the ‘construction of ultimate meaning that is resist-
       ant to the meaning-eroding forces of modernity’ (Aupers, 2012, p. 32).
         In line with Aupers, albeit writing in a different context, George Mitropoulos
       (2022) observes how conspiracists are typically on the side of certainty, rather
       than belief. Mitropoulos associates this certainty with what Jacques Miller has
       called ‘epistemonia’: an inverted transference through which the subject moves
       away from a position of not knowing to earnestly believing one knows. This
       knowing appears in the certainty that Dean (2002) identified decades earlier:
       the conviction that ‘things are not as they seem’, and that the real truth has been
       denied. Thus, rather than indicating we have entered an era in which ‘nobody
       knows anything anymore’—and moreover, in which nobody cares about this—
       the presence of conspiracy theorising can instead signal precisely the opposite,
       namely, a renewed investment in truth, and the fantasy that ‘it’ exists ‘out there’
       such that it might be dis-covered by, and recuperated for, the subject. Contrary
       to the post-truth discourse then, while the contemporary surplus of information
       can lead to widespread distrust, it does not follow that this distrust manifests in a
       widespread disinvestment in truth. Indeed, the notion that subjects distrust official
       sources of knowledge, and therefore no longer care about truth, can be reversed:
       it is not that they no longer care because they distrust, but rather, that they dis-
       trust because they care.                              
         A psychoanalytic reading, as we have suggested above, can help us to understand
       why subjects who subscribe to conspiracy theories, far from not knowing anything
       or caring about the truth, are instead passionately invested in locating and securing
       the truth for themselves, namely, so that their position within the social order can be
       stabilised. It is with respect to this positioning that the structures of race and raciali-
       sation again become crucial to understanding how conspiracy theories work in

[PAGE 16]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 705
                                                             
       liberal-democratic regimes, whose social orders are regulated by whiteness and the
       racial contract—both of which are precisely what the post-truth discourse obscures.
         This obfuscation has been alluded to by Mejia et al., who acknowledge that while
       there are benefits to identifying the problems posed by ‘algorithms, big data, predic-
       tive analytics, [and] insulated information ecosystems’, that nevertheless, the post-
       truth discourse also reproduces a ‘myth that we once lived in an era of unproblem-
       atic truth’, which ‘intersects with a neoconservative nostalgia for a postracial past
       that never existed’ (2018, p. 115). As an extension of this observation, we claim
       that a consequence of the postracial politics of the post-truth discourse, is that it
       works to obscure the fantasy of proximity to knowledge (freedom, authority, power)
       as a racial prerogative that conspiracy theorising fulfils in liberal-democratic con-
       texts. This is because the techno-rationalist post-truth explanation temporalises the
       proliferation of conspiracy theories in liberal-democratic contexts such that they are
       mechanistically explained and become isolated from the ongoing histories of racism
       and whiteness that characterise the very contexts from which they have emerged.
         In contradistinction to this, we instead suggest that another reading is possible
       that the proliferation of conspiracy theorising in liberal-democratic contexts can be
       understood as a form of white backlash which attempts to reclaim the social ‘truth’
       of whiteness and all that it affords the conspiratorial subject. Indeed, this is another
       way of articulating the thesis we have already elucidated above, namely, that in the
       context of liberal-democratic societies, conspiracy theories always-already oper-
       ate via racialised logics insofar as the conspiratorial other they necessarily posit
       assumes its orientation in reference to whiteness. Put simply, the other of liberal-
       democratic societies is not-white by the fact that it possesses something that is not
       theirs. Consequently, any perceived erosion to liberal freedom qua white freedom
       (Stovall, 2021) must be perpetrated by a racialised other who threatens the racial
       contract liberalism establishes with its exalted subject. The techno-rationalist diag-
       nosis of the problem as one resulting merely from the proliferation of new tech-
       nologies thus misses the mark and provides a postracial ‘discourse of distraction’ by
       invoking a public sphere in crisis (Ono, 2010). Its severing manoeuvre attributes and
       confines the emergence of racist conspiracy theories to the present moment (Mejia
       et al. 2018), thereby invisibilising the racial animus that propels and sustains them,
       while divorcing them from the historical-material continuities of racial liberalism
       (Mills, 2017) and the racial contract (Mills, 2014). To this end, the post-truth dis-
       course not only ignores but also obscures racial animus, historical antagonisms, and
       deep social inequalities that persist today: not only those that spur on conspiracy
       theories, but so too those of which conspiracy theories are merely a symptom.
       Conclusion                                            
       In this article, we have attempted to widen the lens through which the contem-
       porary proliferation of conspiracy theories is conceptualised. This has enabled a
       deeper questioning of common assumptions—from both within conspiracy theory
       literature and liberal-democratic society at large—which exceptionalise conspir-
       acy theories and render them as both the irrational preoccupation of ‘extreme’
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 17]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       706                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       actors, and/or as the emerging byproduct of a contemporary crisis of knowledge.
       Both of these manoeuvres cast the phenomenon of conspiracy theories as a dan-
       gerous pathology that, if not requiring securitised intervention, presents a threat
       to the shared reality and social unity imagined by liberalism.
         While conspiracy theories are driven by a belief that ‘things are not as they
       seem’, as Dean observed long ago, we have argued that conspiracy theories
       themselves are not as they seem. Rather than exceptionalising them as a para-
       noid pathology or extremist threat, we have instead argued that the paranoia that
       drives conspiracy theories is inherent to the precarious conditions of all knowl-
       edge, which, as Lacanian psychoanalysis explains, necessarily has a paranoid
       structure for the subject, who is haunted by the other such that its location in the
       social world constantly comes into question. We have argued that the treatment of
       conspiracy theories as a pathological formation that emerges beyond the pale of
       liberal-democratic regimes paves the way for a misdiagnosis of the structures and
       phenomena by which they are caused, and the functions they sometimes fulfil.
         In this misdiagnosis, we have identified the workings of a postracial conceal-
       ment that obscures both the racial animus and racialising function of conspiracy
       thinking in liberal-democratic societies. Contrary to this, we identified a race
       agenda as being present in the shared anti-establishment sentiments that char-
       acterise both overtly racial and seemingly non-racial conspiracy theories, such
       as those related to Covid-19 and the distrust of authorities in general. Prevailing
       readings that split conspiracy theories into racial and non-racial, while character-
       ising the former as extreme and harmful, and the latter as pathological but (rela-
       tively) unharmful, effectuate a postracial manoeuvre that obscures the continuity
       between the two.                                      
         We have also argued against a common reading of rising conspiracy theories
       as a signal that we have entered a post-truth era. This interpretation, we claim,
       reproduces a similar postracial obfuscation. Portraying the correlative prolifera-
       tion of information and distrust as a sign that ‘nobody knows anything anymore’,
       and that no one cares, not only offers a simplistic reading of knowledge and sub-
       jectivity, but also works in the service of the postracial by both (re)producing and
       then relying upon an historical erasure. This is because the techno-rationality of
       the post-truth explanation temporalises and circumscribes the emergence of con-
       spiracy theories such that they become isolated from the ongoing, but often unac-
       knowledged racial dimensions of the liberal-democratic imaginary. While both
       scholarly and popular theories about conspiracy theories tend towards apolitical
       and ahistorical explanations, the psychoanalytic framework we have employed to
       trace the politics of the postracial has enabled a more nuanced reading. Lacan-
       ian psychoanalysis reveals conspiracy theories are not disturbances of the pub-
       lic sphere, but rather, symptoms of a repressed racial structure that is repeatedly
       disavowed.                                            
       Acknowledgements This research was funded by a grant from the Anti-Racism Hallmark Research Ini-
       tiative at the University of Melbourne. We would also like to express our appreciation to the editor and
       anonymous reviewers for their insightful and generous feedback.
       Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.

[PAGE 18]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 707
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
       use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
       sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
       licenses/by/4.0/.                                     
       References                                            
                                                             
       Ahlstrom-Vij, K. (2023) Do we live in a ‘post-truth’ era? Political Studies 71(2): 501–517.
       Ahmed, W., Downing, J., Vidal-Alaball, J. and Lopez Seguí, F. (2020) COVID-19 and the 5G con-
         spiracy theory: social network analysis of twitter data. Journal of Medical Internet Research
         22(5): e19458.                                      
       Anderson, J. and Raine L. (2017). The future of truth and misinformation online. Pew Research
         Center, October 17. https://w ww.p ewres earch.o rg/i ntern et/2 017/1 0/1 9/t he-f uture-o f-t ruth-a nd-
         misinf ormat ion-o nline/                           
       Asad, T. (2003) Formations of the secular: Christianity, Islam, modernity. Stanford University Press.
       Aupers, S. (2012) ‘Trust no one’: Modernization, paranoia and conspiracy culture. European Journal
         of Communication 27(1): 22–34.                      
       Bennett, W.L. and Livingston, S. (2023) A brief history of the disinformation age: Information
         wars and the decline of institutional authority. Streamlining political communication concepts:
         Updates, changes, normalcies. Springer International Publishing, pp. 43–73.
       Biddlestone, M., Green, R. and Douglas, K.M. (2020) Cultural orientation, power, belief in conspir-
         acy theories, and intentions to reduce the spread of COVID-19. British Journal of Social Psy-
         chology 59(3): 663–673.                             
       Bjerg, O. and Presskorn-Thygesen, T. (2017) Conspiracy theory: Truth claim or language game? The-
         ory, Culture and Society 34(1): 137–159.            
       Bonilla-Silva, E. (2015) The structure of racism in color-blind, ‘Post-Racial’ America. American
         Behavioral Scientist 59(11): 1358–1376.             
       Buarque, B. (2022) Is it conspiracy or ‘Truth’? Examining the legitimation of the 5G conspiracy the-
         ory during the Covid-19 pandemic. Social Epistemology 36(3): 317–328.
       Butter, M. (2014) Plots, designs and schemes: American conspiracy theories from the puritans to the
         present. Walter de Gruyter, Germany.                
       Dean, J. (2002) Publicity’s secret: How technoculture capitalizes on democracy. Cornell University
         Press.                                              
       Dolan, E.W. (2020). Conspiracy mentality linked to non-compliance with official—But not unoffi-
         cial—Coronavirus prevention measures. PsyPost, June 30. https://w ww.p sypos t.o rg/2 020/0 6/
         conspi racy-m ental ity-l inked-t o-n oncom plian ce-w ith-o ffici al-b ut-n ot-u noff i cial-c orona virus-
         preven tion-m easur es-5 7186                       
       Enfield, N. (2017). We’re in a post-truth world with eroding trust and accountability. It can’t end well.
         The Guardian, November 17. https://w ww.t hegua rdian.c om/c ommen tisfr ee/2 017/n ov/1 7/w ere-
         in-a-p ost-t ruth-w orld-w ith-e rodin g-t rust-a nd-a ccoun tabil ity-i t-c ant-e nd-w ell
       Farkas, J. and Schou, J. (2019) Post-truth, fake news and democracy: Mapping the politics of false-
         hood. Routledge.                                    
       Fink, B. (1995) The Lacanian subject: Between language and Jouissance. Princeton University Press.
       Frankenberg, R. (1993) White women. The social construction of whiteness. University of Minnesota
         Press.                                              
       Freelon, D. and Wells, C. (2020) Disinformation as political communication. Political Communica-
         tion 37(2): 145–156.                                
       Gillespie, L. and Ghumkhor, S. (2024) Conspiracy theories, racial liberalism and fantasies of free-
         dom. Law Critique. https://d oi.o rg/1 0.1 007/s 10978-0 24-0 9393-6.
       Goldberg, D.T. (2015) Are we all postracial yet?. Wiley.

[PAGE 19]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       708                                    S. Ghumkhor et al.
                                                             
       Haggis, J. (2004) Thoughts on a politics of whiteness in a (never quite post) colonial country: aboli-
         tionism, essentialism and incommensurability. In A. Moreton-Robinson (ed.) Whitening race:
         Essays in social and cultural criticism. Aboriginal Studies Press.
       Hannon, M. (2023) The politics of post-truth. Critical Review 35(1–2): 40–62.
       Horvat, K.V. (2021) Conspiracy theories and the crisis of the public sphere: COVID-19 in Slovenia.
         Javnost - the Public 28(2): 219–235.                
       Jane, E.A. and Fleming, C. (2014) Modern conspiracy: The importance of being paranoid. Blooms-
         bury Publishing.                                    
       Jolley, D. and Paterson, J.L. (2020) Pylons Ablaze: Examining the role of 5G COVID-19 conspiracy
         beliefs and support for violence. British Journal of Social Psychology 59(3): 628–640.
       Kakutani, M. (2018). The death of truth: how we gave up on facts and ended up with
         trump. The Guardian, July 14. https://w ww.t hegua rdian.c om/b ooks/2 018/j ul/1 4/
         the-d eath-o f-t ruth-h ow-w e-g ave-u p-o n-f acts-a nd-e nded-u p-w ith-t rump
       Khalel, S. (2020). Masks to Sharia: QAnon is spreading anti-Muslim ideology via coronavirus oppo-
         sition. Middle East Eye, July 20. https://w ww.m iddle easte ye.n et/n ews/m asks-s haria-q anon-s prea
         ding-a nti-m uslim-i deolo gy-c orona virus-o pposi tion
       Lacan, J. (2006). Ecrits: The First Complete Edition in English, Fink B. (trans.), W.W. Norton.
       Lacan, J. and Miller, J.A. (2018). The Four Fundamentals Concepts of Psycho-analysis. Miller J.A.
         (ed.), Sheridan A. (trans.). Routledge              
       Lentin, A. and Titley, G. (2011) The crises of multiculturalism: Racism in a neoliberal age. Zed
         Books Ltd.                                          
       Losurdo, D. (2011) Liberalism: A Counter History, Elliot G. (trans.), Verso Books
       McIntyre, L. (2018) Post-truth. MIT Press.            
       Mejia, R., Beckermann, K. and Sullivan, C. (2018) White lies: a racial history of the (post)truth. Com-
         munication and Critical/Cultural Studies 15(2): 109–126.
       Mills, C.W. (2008) Racial Liberalism. PMLA, Special Topic: Comparative Racialisation 123(5):
         1380–1397.                                          
       Mills, C.W. (2014) The racial contract. Cornell University Press.
       Mills, C.W. (2017) Black rights/white wrongs: The critique of racial liberalism. Oxford University
         Press.                                              
       Mills, J. (2003) Lacan on paranoiac knowledge. Psychoanalytic Psychology 20(1): 30–51.
       Mitropoulos, G.B. (2022). Conspiracism and psychoanalysis: The side of meaning the side of cause.
         Lacanian Review Online, February 23. https://w ww.t helac anian revie ws.c om/c onspi racis m-a nd-
         psycho analy sis-t he-s ide-o f-m eanin g-a nd-t he-s ide-o f-c ause/
       Morsi, Y. (2017) Radical skin, moderate mask: Deradicalising the Muslim in post-racial societies.
         Rowman & Littlefield.                               
       Myres, J.D. (2018) Post-truth as symptom: The emergence of a masculine hysteria. Philosophy &
         Rhetoric 51(4): 392–415.                            
       Ono, K. (2010) Postracism: A theory of the ‘Post-’ as political strategy. Journal of Communication
         Inquiry 34(3): 227–233.                             
       Pond, P. (2020) Complexity, digital media and post truth politics: A theory of interactive systems.
         Palgrave MacMillan.                                 
       Seshadri-Crooks, K. (2000) Desiring whiteness: A Lacanian analysis of race. Routledge.
       Stavrakakis, Y. (1999) Lacan and the political. Routledge.
       Stovall, T. (2021) White freedom: The racial history of an idea. Princeton University Press.
       Tazamal, M. (2020). Islamophobia in 2020: Covid-19 and Conspiracy Theories. Bridge Initiative,
         Georgetown University, December 22. https://b ridge.g eorge town.e du/r esear ch/i slamo phobi a-i n-
         2020-c ovid-1 9-a nd-c onspi racy-t heori es/       
       Thobani, S. (2007) Exalted subjects: Studies in the making of race and Nation in Canada. University
         of Toronto Press.                                   
       Tripodi, F.B. (2022) The propagandists’ playbook: How conservative elites manipulate search and
         threaten democracy. Yale University Press.          
       Vatter, M. (2004) Strauss and schmitt as readers of Hobbes and Spinoza: On the relation between
         political theology and liberalism. CR: The New Centennial Review 4(3): 161–214.
       Viala-Gaudefroy, J. and Lindaman, D. (2020). Donald Trump’s ‘Chinese Virus’: the politics of nam-
         ing. The Conversation, April 22. https://t hecon versa tion.c om/d onald-t rumps-c hines e-v irus-t he-
         politi cs-o f-n aming-1 36796                       

[PAGE 20]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Race still matters: the (post) racial politics of conspiracy… 709
                                                             
       Zupančič, A. (2022) A short essay on conspiracy theories. In A. Johnston, B. Nedoh and A. Zupančič
         (eds.) Objective fictions: philosophy, psychoanalysis, marxism. Edinburgh University Press.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
       maps and institutional affiliations.                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Sahar Ghumkhor is a senior lecturer in criminology at the University of Melbourne, Australia. Her work
       explores the intersections of racism/Islamophobia, psychoanalysis, and political violence.
       Liam Gillespie is a lecturer in criminology at the University of Melbourne whose work is broadly con-
       cerned with far-right political violence, ethnic nationalism, and white supremacy.
                                                             
       Sean McMorrow is an editor of Parrhesia: A Journal of Critical Philosophy. He teaches in the department
       of media and communications at the University of Melbourne and is the author of The Power to Assume
       Form: Cornelius Castoriadis and Regimes of Historicity (Lexington Books, 2023) and co-editor of Mar-
       cel Gauchet and the Crisis of Democratic Politics (Routledge, 2022).
       Authors and Affiliations                              
                                                             
       Sahar Ghumkhor1 · Liam Gillespie1 · Sean McMorrow1    
                                                             
       *                                                     
         Sahar Ghumkhor                                      
         ghumkhor@unimelb.edu.au                             
         Liam Gillespie                                      
         liam.gillespie@unimelb.edu.au                       
         Sean McMorrow                                       
         sean.mcmorrow@unimelb.edu.au                        
       1 University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             