[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2026) 25:9             
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00788-3            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       At the margins of the modern state                    
                                                             
       Seyla Benhabib, London: Polity, 2025, 224 pp., ISBN 978-1-509-56357-
       9                                                     
                                                             
       Peter Niesen1                                         
                                                             
                                                             
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2026
                                                             
                                                             
       Frankfurt School-type critical theory has increasingly come under pressure for being
       insufficiently attentive to perspectives from the global south, or oblivious of colonial
       history. The strength of Seyla Benhabib’s new book lies in its persistence in repairing
       the eclipse of non-western perspectives in contemporary accounts of cosmopolitan-
       ism. The collection of re-worked essays is bookended by two articles on Habermas,
       spanning a generation of reflections on the claims to normativity of the modern state.
       The first deals with the ‘spectre of sovereignty’ roaming Habermas’s Between Facts
       and Norms, the last, on the late magnum opus, Also a History of Philosophy, with
       its owl-of-Minerva account of human rights and democratic institutions. The former
       discusses the limits of Habermas’ reconciliation of liberal and republican theories for
       the nation state, while the latter criticizes Habermas for attempting to reconstruct a
       ‘Phenomenology of Spirit’ from a genealogy of occidental reason alone. From the
       second chapter, on Hegel and international human rights, Benhabib leaves the bound-
       aries of state-based political analysis behind, only to return to them in a somewhat
       perfunctory conceptual essay on the notions of sovereignty and of constituent power.
       All other chapters start out from phenomena that have long been transcending the
       margins of the democratic nation state, whether in relation to European integration
       and fragmentation after Brexit, or with regard to global issues such as human rights,
       intervention, migration, or decolonization.           
         The centrepieces of the book are two major new essays on cosmopolitanism. They
       had already formed the skeleton of Benhabib’s Albert Hirschman memorial lectures
       at the Vienna Institut für die Wissenschaften vom Menschen, which also embedded
       them in a plea for a more embodied understanding of rationality (Benhabib, 2024).
       The first one picks up where Benhabib had left off her investigation in her trail-
       blazing The Rights of Others (2004) and the accompanying Tanner Lectures (2006).
                                                             
         Peter Niesen                                        
         peter.niesen@uni-hamburg.de                         
       1 University of Hamburg, 20146 Hamburg, Germany       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        9  Page 2 of 4                            P. Niesen  
                                                             
       It is entitled ‘Beyond the Hermeneutics of Suspicion: Reconstructing Cosmopolitan
       Law’. Whereas the earlier works started from Kant’s Toward Perpetual Peace and
       went on to develop freestanding perspectives on global migration and human rights,
       the new essays are facing the postcolonial and post-Holocene predicament that has
       dominated the discussion of Kant, and of much else, in the meantime. Benhabib
       takes up these discussions in a constructive spirit and reaches a systematic position
       that could serve, in hindsight, to inform our interpretations of Kant’s international
       thought as well.                                      
         Cosmopolitan law is a term first introduced in Toward Perpetual Peace to achieve
       three very different aims: the protection of vulnerable involuntary migrants, the erect-
       ing of an infrastructure of global communication, and a denunciation of European
       colonialism. The combination of the three, seen through the lens of the racist ste-
       reotypes used in much of Kant’s anthropology, has remained a constant puzzle to
       interpreters. How can Kant at the same time allow access to non-European countries
       and avoid colonization via the setting up of trading bases? How can he not publicly
       renounce his racist views when explicitly exempting non-state peoples from the duty
       to form a state, and warning off European would-be colonizers? Benhabib had ear-
       lier diagnosed an ‘unbridgeable gap’ between Kant’s humanitarianism for refugees
       and lack of concern for all other migrants (Benhabib, 2004: 38), and now engages
       the potential asymmetries created by what she takes to be an overly rationalist form
       of cosmopolitanism, deductively developed from a strong notion of autonomy. She
       engages with de- and post-colonial writers such as Walter Mignolo and Ines Val-
       dez, both of whom seem to be painting with too broad a brush when they doubt the
       genuineness of Kant’s anti-colonialism and subsume him to a pre-conceived colonial
       syndrome of racism and capitalism. Benhabib does not explicitly side with Pauline
       Kleingeld’s reading that sees a radical break in Kant’s attitude toward racism toward
       the end of his career, but perhaps lets Kant off the hook too easily by suggesting a
       gradual shift. The incontrovertible textual evidence for both anti-colonialism and rac-
       ism in Kant still stands in need of explanation.      
         In transforming Kant’s ideas on cosmopolitan institutions, Benhabib invokes the
       tradition of Third World Approaches to International Law and instructively engages
       with a suggestion by Tendayi Achiume, a former special rapporteuse to the United
       Nations, to award colonizers and their erstwhile colonies ‘co-sovereignty’, in giving
       the latter access to migration rights, based on historical injustice, not considerations
       of vulnerability. In contrast to defeatist or cynical readings of western hegemony in
       its formation, Benhabib insists that international law can be redeemed if we adopt
       a position she calls ‘postcolonial cosmopolitanism’, which demands jurisdictional
       boundaries but also respects the ‘anthropologically deep-seated drive’ to mobility
       and migration. Benhabib reminds us that ‘the regulation of human mobility through
       national borders is quite recent in human history’, but does not advocate the raz-
       ing of state borders. She awards priority to the claims of people against their own
       governments, and to mitigation duties on the side of the developed countries. And
       she presciently notes that tyranny is on the rise not just with the erosion of domestic
       democratic institutions, but especially ‘with the treatment of other human beings as
       if they were property to be disposed of, or children to be educated, or criminals to be
       deported’ (p. 92).                                    

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       At the margins of the modern state   Page 3 of 4 9    
                                                             
         The second core essay is entitled ‘Politics in a Planetary Age: The Globe as World,
       Earth, and Planet’. It is a foray into the metaphysics of ecological destruction through
       climate change in authors such as Dipesh Chakrabarty and Bruno Latour. Relegating
       reflections on the ‘boundary problem’ in democratic theory to a niche problem, the
       Anthropocene forces us to think of ourselves as ‘co-habitants of this planet’ (p. 129).
       While the globe can be read, with Chakrabarty, as a ‘humanocentric construction’,
       the notion of the planet decenters ‘the human in our narratives of the world’. This
       helps to include, at least in perspective, concerns for non-human entities such as ani-
       mals, plants, rivers and ‘nature’ in an enlarged cosmopolitan perspective.
         But relying on a substantive notion of ‘earth’ is not without dangers. Benhabib
       chides Chakrabarty and Latour for ignoring the political meaning of its invocations
       in Heideggerian nostalgia for the Scholle and Carl Schmittian orientations toward the
       Großraum. The problem will not arise with more sober accounts of the planetary sur-
       face, and the initiated will remember that the title of her article is an allusion to Kant,
       whose assumptions about cosmopolitan law are based on the spherical character of
       the earth as globus terraqeus – a ball of earth and water. For Kant, the normative
       meaning of the bounded surface of the earth is that humans are physically united in
       a community of fate, since extended beings on a limited territory cannot avoid com-
       ing in contact with each other, and need to establish legal relations with all others to
       compensate for it. Kant accentuates this necessity by distinguishing Erdbürger from
       Weltbürger, ‘citizens of the world’ all, alas, in the Gregor translation (Kant VI 353;
       VI 281).                                              
         Now that the notion of Erdbürgerschaft, in addition to Europe-induced Weltbürg-
       erschaft, has been firmly established by anthropogenic climate change, we need to
       ask whether it is capable of unfolding a distinctively political meaning. In her earlier
       work, Benhabib brushed away the idea that our planetary condition plays a justifica-
       tory role for cosmopolitan law as a mere ‘circumstance of justice’ (2004, p. 33, but
       see Huber, 2023). It is tempting to read her discussion with Chakrabarty as indicating
       a change of mind, rehabilitating the normative meaning of our predicament on this
       planetary surface. This would be productive, since one way of distinguishing world
       citizenship and earth citizenship is that the latter seems less vulnerable to, and less
       dependent on, occidental epistemology or perfectionist teleology. Co-habitation on
       the basis of an ‘original possession in common’ seems less vulnerable to unmask-
       ing racist convictions than just ascribing an exotic normative autarchy for non-state
       peoples on Kant’s part (Niesen, 2024). This would explain Kant’s Eurocentrism,
       as far as a rationalist conception of an epistemic Weltbürgertum is concerned, but
       leave untouched Weltbürgerrecht as resting on earth citizenship. We see how the
       distinctions introduced to the ontology of cosmopolitanism help to make sense of our
       Enlightenment conceptual heritage. Benhabib sticks to her guns when she interprets
       the Kantian world (a noumenal category, which is constitutively neither spheric nor
       non-spheric) as the space where we build political institutions with others, but leaves
       open an alternative strategy in granting that the Earth is a yet-to-be-developed sphere
       of ‘ethical’ realization.                             
                                                             
                                                             

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
        9  Page 4 of 4                            P. Niesen  
       References                                            
                                                             
       Benhabib, S. (2004). The rights of others. Oxford University Press.
       Benhabib, S. (2006). Another cosmopolitanism. Berkeley Tanner Lectures. Oxford University Press.
       Benhabib, S. (2024). Kosmopolitismus im Wandel. Zwischen Demos, Kosmos und Globus. Mandelbaum.
       Huber, J. (2023). Grounded Cosmopolitanism. Original Common Possession and the Right to Visit. Oxford
         University Press.                                   
       Kant, I. (1996). [1797]) ‘The metaphysics of morals’ in Kant, I. In M. J. Gregor (eds.), Practical philoso-
         phy (pp. 355–603). Cambridge University Press. (VI 205-VI 493).
       Niesen, P. (2024). Wohin mit Kants politischer Philosophie? Zeitschrift für Politische Theorie, 1, 149–168.
       Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             