[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:834–837       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00756-x            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       The political theory of liberal socialism             
                                                             
       Matthew McManus Oxford/New York: Routledge, 2025, 268 pp., ISBN:
       9781032647234                                         
                                                             
       Florian Maiwald1                                      
                                                             
       Published online: 20 May 2025                         
       © The Author(s) 2025                                  
                                                             
                                                             
       In his book, The Political Theory of Liberal Socialism, Matthew McManus (2025)
       devotes himself to the ambitious project of facilitating a ‘retrieval’ (a methodology
       which is inspired by the Canadian political theorist C.B. Mcpherson) of the liberal-
       socialist tradition (p. 3). In this context, the term retrieval is to be understood as a
       key concept if the argumentative function of McManus’ innovative work is to be
       grasped; it is therefore about nothing less than a historical–ideological reconstruc-
       tion of the liberal-socialist tradition. This reconstruction—this remark is of great
       significance in this context—does not serve the sole purpose of providing a descrip-
       tive overview of the liberal-socialist tradition. Rather, McManus’ intention is to
       make both past and present approaches in liberal-socialist theory usable for future
       political projects, both on a theoretical and on a practical level for progressive move-
       ments (p. 3).                                         
         To enable this form of retrieval in the form of a critical historical reconstruc-
       tion of the liberal-socialist idea, McManus’ prepares a unique overview of the most
       important representatives of the liberal-socialist tradition—which, unfortunately,
       cannot be discussed in detail in the context of a short review. Both liberals and
       socialists, such as Thomas Paine, Mary Wollstonecraft, John Stuart Mill, Karl Marx,
       John Maynard Keynes, C.B. Macpherson, John Rawls, Carlo Rosselli, Noberto Bob-
       bio, Charles Mills, Chantal Mouffe, and Axel Honneth form the center of McManus’
       discussion. Almost every one of these thinkers is given their own chapter, which
       greatly enhances the clarity and readability of McManus’ work
         In the first chapter, McManus undertakes a definitional and conceptual approach
       regarding the political theory of liberal socialism. In doing so, McManus works out
       three core normative principles that are to be regarded, according to his line of argu-
       mentation, as formative for the liberal-socialist worldview: (1) A methodological
       collectivist social ontology with respect to normative individualism; (2) an approach
       based on developmental ethics, which consists of granting every individual the
       *                                                     
         Florian Maiwald                                     
         fmaiwald@uni-bonn.de                                
       1 University of Bonn, 53113 Bonn, Germany             
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political theory of liberal socialism    835      
                                                             
       opportunity to lead the best possible life—in the spirit of equality—which in turn is
       linked to the provision of the necessary institutional and economic conditions, and;
       (3) a liberal-democratic participation structure at the political and social level, which
       also extends to the family and economic sphere (pp. 17-18).
         When McManus points out that liberal-socialists feel committed to a form of nor-
       mative individualism, he is referring to the idea that any form of social organiza-
       tion can only be justified in a meaningful way by recourse to the well-being of the
       individual. At the same time, however, McManus also points out that the objective
       of normative individualism is dependent on a fundamentally different anthropolog-
       ical and sociological premise than classical liberal approaches. Instead of assum-
       ing atomized individuals, liberal-socialist theorizing builds on the assumption of a
       methodological collectivist sociology. In other words, humans are to be regarded as
       fundamentally interdependent beings who can only form their own genuinely human
       capacities (which can be both desirable and dangerous) in interaction with other
       human beings (p. 18).                                 
         According to McManus, the second normative core principle of the liberal-
       socialist idea—the developmental-ethic approach—is inseparably linked to the first
       core normative principle. On this view, each individual should have an equal oppor-
       tunity to develop their own capacities and live a life as fulfilling as possible. In order
       to achieve this normative aim, shared resources need to be provided, and specific
       social institutions have to be designed (pp. 18-19).  
         The third normative core principle of the liberal-socialist approach—the existence
       of a liberal-democratic participation structure and its extension to the economic and
       family sphere—ultimately aims to liberate the social totality as completely as possi-
       ble from relations of power and exploitation—to use the jargon of critical theory (p.
       20). If one compares the liberal-socialist approach regarding liberal-democratic par-
       ticipation structures with classical liberal approaches, it becomes particularly clear
       that a fully comprehensive liberal democracy can only be realized if the economic
       and family spheres are included.                      
         Against the background of the listing of these three normative core principles,
       McManus defines the liberal-socialist idea as a       
         political theory committed to instituting a basic structure securing the equal
         substantive and social freedom of all society’s members as a basis for their
         shared developmental flourishing by combining support for liberal political
         institutions and rights with equitable and democratic economic arrangements
         (p. 17).                                            
         In short, freedom without specific forms of equality remains on a level of abstrac-
       tion, and an equality that wants to see the freedom of the individual exposed to
       negation can turn into blind forms of tyranny—both trends that the liberal-socialist
       approach wants to pose an alternative to.             
         As already mentioned, McManus offers a constructive and at the same time
       critical overview of the thinkers who are relevant in the context of liberal-social-
       ist theory discourse. It is precisely the diversity of thinkers (which McManus pre-
       sents in a brilliant and accessible way) that highlights a particular strength of the
                                                             

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       836                                       F. Maiwald  
                                                             
       liberal-socialist tradition: The adjective liberal is indeed to be taken at its word,
       as there is a heterogeneity of interpretations of how liberal-socialist theory should
       be shaped and can be transformed as meaningfully as possible into socio-political
       practice (of particular relevance in an age in which many left-wing movements
       seem to be submitting to a politically paralyzing orthodoxy).
         Toward the end of his book, McManus addresses the interesting question of
       whether there is a future for the liberal-socialist project. This question seems even
       more relevant considering the current world situation. Fukuyama’s idea of an ‘end
       of history’ (Stiglitz, 2025), according to which an unstoppable process of liberal
       democratization takes place on a global level, currently seems a distant prospect.
       Not least the re-election of Donald Trump and the immense political influence
       that actors such as Elon Musk are able to exert due to their massive wealth make
       it abundantly clear that some sort of oligarchic capitalism could establish itself as
       a new form politics in western societies.             
         Against the backdrop of Trump’s election victory, economist and Nobel Prize
       winner Joseph Stiglitz even assumes that the principle of progress itself—a prod-
       uct of the age of enlightenment—could come to an end (Stiglitz, 2025). Trump’s
       re-election furthermore illustrates that capitalist ways of organizing the economy
       are not necessarily related to democratic core principles—at the same time, how-
       ever, the authoritarian temptation of centralized forms of socialism, as prevalent
       in the Soviet Union, must also be avoided.            
         Could the liberal-socialist approach be a viable alternative? Toward the end of
       the book, McManus addresses the question of whether the liberal-socialist idea
       could have a future. In doing so, he emphasizes the normative essence of the lib-
       eral-socialist project, which at the same time shows—despite all the weaknesses
       that the liberal-socialist project may have (which McManus also addresses)—why
       it is worth pursuing this political project on both a theoretical and a practical
       level:                                                
         For all their warts, liberals and socialists have done more to bring about a
         genuinely free and equal society than anyone else. If they are to flourish in
         the 21st century and beyond, they need to inspire with the hope of a better
         world to come for those living and their great grandchildren. Liberal social-
         ism can offer such inspiration and be worthy of loyalty and perhaps even
         love. It deserves a chance at the future (p. 233).  
         I fully share McManus’ view: liberalism has been (and still is) caught up in
       some unfortunate and toxic relationships—whether it is Cold War liberalism, neo-
       liberalism, post-liberalism, or other ideological configurations. What is crucial is
       that the right dating partner for liberalism is found again: a democratic socialist
       approach. This would result in a hopeful marriage that can be subsumed under
       the term liberal socialism. When focusing on the question of the future practica-
       bility of the liberal-socialist project, it is important to remember, with reference
       to thinkers like Alain Badiou (2012) and Žižek (2016), that the phenomenon of
       love—be it love for a person or, as in this case, love for a political project—is
       always characterized by a radical form of openness and contingency (which, of
       course, also implies the risk of failure). But should this risk lead us to give up our

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The political theory of liberal socialism    837      
                                                             
       belief in true love? Or, as Badiou and Žižek rightly point out, can true love only
       be fully understood in light of this risk? If one believes in the latter thesis, there
       may indeed be a future for the liberal-socialist approach. Through his impressive
       work, McManus has undoubtedly contributed to bringing us a step closer to this
       goal—one might even say that McManus’ book might be the perfect wingmate
       for this beautiful romance between two revolutionary political worldviews.
       Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
       Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
       which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
       as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
       Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
       article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
       to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
       use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis-
       sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
       licenses/by/4.0/.                                     
       References                                            
                                                             
       Badiou, A. and Truong, N. (2012) In praise of love. Serpent’s Tail.
       McManus, M. (2025) The political theory of liberal socialism. Routledge.
       Stiglitz, J.E. (2025). ’The End of progress?’. Project syndicate. Retrieved January 21, from https:// www.
         proje ct- syndi cate. org/ comme ntary/ trump- return- to- power- amoun ts- to- end- of- progr ess- by- joseph- e-
         stigl itz- 2025- 01.                                
       Žižek, S. (2016). ‘Slavoj Zizek’. YouTube video. Retrieved January 22, from https:// www. youtu be. com/
         watch? v=- u9eyI mD3i4.                             
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             