[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:846–849       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00772-x            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       The anarchist before the law: law without authority   
                                                             
       Saul Newman and Massimo La Torre, Edinburgh University Press,
       Edinburgh, 2024, 280 pp., ISBN 9781399513180          
                                                             
       Christos Marneros1                                    
                                                             
       Published online: 25 June 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       It is a good time to be an academic working on the (unlikely) intersections between
       law and anarchism and/or an anarchist interested in the operation of the law. After
       the publication of Elena Loizidou’s Anarchism: An Art of Living without Law (1),
       Saul Newman and Massimo La Torre’s book offers a completely different account
       of the relationship between law, anarchism and anarchists. Whilst Loizidou’s book
       argues that an anarchic life without law is possible and desirable, Newman and La
       Torre aim to offer ‘a productive tension that allows us to think both anarchism and
       legal theory in new ways’ (p. xiv).                   
         The book is the product of two authors from different disciplines (Newman being
       a political theorist and La Torre a legal theorist). More importantly, the authors
       belong to two different (philosophical) traditions (Newman to the continental tradi-
       tion and La Torre to the analytic one), so at best they engage critically with each
       other and at worst they completely refuse to engage with or even recognise each
       other’s validity as a tradition. The Anarchist Before the Law is, indeed, a book of
       productive tension in many ways and this is, perhaps, its fundamental strength.
         The central argument of the book is that the law is not per se oppositional to
       anarchist thought. Whilst the current understanding of the law and its institutions is
       largely based on a hierarchical and authoritarian capitalist system (irrespective of
       whether we talk about liberal democracies or authoritarian regimes), this does not
       preclude the possibility of an alternative anti-foundational, anarchist law. Whilst, so
       far, the examination of law and anarchism focussed on the latter’s destituting power
       – that is anarchism’s desire to destroy any form of hierarchical structures, with the
       state and the law considered as its fundamental enemies – the book aims to focus on
       anarchism’s instituting power. According to the authors, this feature of anarchism is
       capable of freeing ‘law from the model of sovereign authority and political theology
       …. Anarchism, in this sense, makes law and legal institution a practice of freedom’
       (pp. xiii-xiv).                                       
       *                                                     
         Christos Marneros                                   
         christos.marneros@rhul.ac.uk                        
       1 Royal Holloway University of London, Egham TW20 0EX, UK
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The anarchist before the law: law without authority 847
                                                             
         In their admirable and fascinating endeavour, Newman and La Torre offer a
       remarkable (re)reading of different theories and practices of anarchist tradition
       (from ‘classical’ nineteenth-century anarchism to an individualist and post-anar-
       chist tradition), normative and analytic legal theories which belong mainly to the
       liberal tradition politically (in which I include their reading of philosophical anar-
       chism) and continental political philosophy (with figures such as Walter Benjamin,
       Carl Schmitt and Gilles Deleuze appearing to complement the more traditional takes
       on anarchism). In addition, the book offers a refreshing reading of notions, such as
       disobedience, violence and human rights. To that extent, readers interested in one or
       more traditions and/or notions would be benefited by reading the relevant chapters
       of the book independently. Yet, I should emphasise that the uniqueness and original-
       ity of this work lies on the fact that it harmoniously brings together all these dif-
       ferent traditions and influences without making any of its parts look irrelevant and
       superfluous.                                          
         The first chapter offers a great overview of classical anarchism’s opposition to
       legal norms and political obligations. It functions as a prelude that presents multiple
       texts of anarchist theory against the law. The authors bring together their respective
       expertise and influence to demonstrate the similarities and differences of anarchist
       tendencies, e.g. from anarcho-communism (Mikhail Bakunin, Pyotr Kropotkin) to
       individualist anarchism (Max Stirner). They effectively present some intersecting
       points when it comes to the critique of the law, such as the ways in which these dif-
       ferent tendencies criticise law’s claim of authority, its demand for obedience and the
       creation of obligations which are incompatible with individual autonomy (pp. 2-10).
         The subsequent chapter is perhaps one of the most interesting parts of the
       book, at least for researchers and students of legal theory. In chapter two, we
       encounter a refreshing reading of some of the most important legal theories of
       Anglo-American, analytic tradition, namely, legal positivism, natural law and
       legal realism. The jurisprudential discussions around these theories focus on their
       conflicting views on the nature and/or concept of law, the place of morality and
       the role of the judiciary in the process of law creation. Yet, such discussions are
       often obsolete or even explicitly uninterested in the place of the law in society
       and its central role in affecting our lives and our politics. Newman and La Torre
       approach them from a different perspective. Starting with legal positivism’s neu-
       trality and separability thesis – law is neutral and separate from moral and politi-
       cal considerations – the authors, somehow ironically but correctly suggest that
       for a positivist, such as Kelsen, ‘even an anarchist could teach law, since legal
       theory can assume a strictly “pure”, neutral, form’ (p. 33). Yet, since legal posi-
       tivism presupposes the existence of a sovereign who holds the power to posit the
       law – thus, the law justifies the idea of the monopoly of violence held by the
       sovereign – this cannot be compatible with an anarchist vision of the law (p. 35).
       Similarly, when it comes to natural law, they crucially point out that ‘natural law
       doctrines very often share with legal positivists the view of law as being based on
       coercion and force, whilst only adding a moral point to qualify such authoritar-
       ian social ontology’ (p. 35). Thus, its incompatibility with anarchism is evident.
       In the final part of the chapter, we encounter the first element of the instituting
       power of the law. Building on a radical understanding of the notion of institution,

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       848                                       C. Marneros 
                                                             
       found in the works of Maurice Hauriou, Deleuze and Cornelius Castoriadis, the
       authors present an image of (anarchist) legal institutions as a cause of action and
       creation, without authority and coercion (pp. 48-51). 
         The following four chapters (three to six) build on both the destituting and
       instituting power of the law through the destruction of the old, hierarchical insti-
       tutions and the formation of anarchist, creative ones. In chapter three, there is an
       interesting discussion of an alternative ontology of sovereignty – a ‘subversive
       one’ (p. 59). They develop this argument through Baruch Spinoza’s immanent
       philosophy that opposes the notion of a transcendent God Who stands above His
       creation. As such, in the next chapter, through an examination of Carl Schmitt’s
       attack on anarchism, the authors argue for the development of a non-foundational
       political theology (pp. 84-85). Ultimately, chapter six revisits the notion of ‘the
       state’ and argues for a reconceptualization of it. It supports a notion of a dif-
       ferent sense of belonging in a community, where the state is seen as ‘a public
       institution of care’ (p. 130). Whilst it remains difficult to me to see how a state
       can be formed based on non-hierarchical relations, as, in my view, such relations
       presuppose the notion of the state, the argument presented here is persuasive. Per-
       haps, the disagreement is mainly a matter of terminology rather than political
       aspirations.                                          
         The last three chapters (seven to nine) focus on three integral concepts that
       shape the relationship between anarchism and law, namely violence, (dis)obedi-
       ence and human rights. Unsurprisingly, the discussion of violence is focussed on
       Georges Sorel and Walter Benjamin and especially the latter’s ‘Critique of Vio-
       lence’ and the distinction between ‘mythic violence’ which is law-creating and
       law-affirming and divine violence, which is law-destroying (pp. 138-148). The
       authors suggest that anarchism can propose a different kind of ‘violence against
       violence’ (p. 148), what we may call an insurrection as a tactic amongst others.
       In their discussion of (dis)obedience, the authors develop an original reading of
       Étienne La Boétie’s essay on voluntary servitude in order to develop an ontology
       of anarchy which argues that our disobedience can be an integral aspect for the
       disorientation of power and coercion (pp. 187-189). Finally, chapter nine focuses
       on an anarchist conception of human rights that are not based on universal ideas
       and foundational principles, such as a common notion of humanity, but are a pro-
       cess for the creation of ‘new modes of subjectivity, new ways of living, new ways
       of relating to others and to ourselves that are no longer tied to the liberal idea
       of the individual’ (p. 215). This is a thought-provoking take on human rights;
       however, I remain sceptical about any positive contribution that human rights can
       have to anarchist polity. This is because, unlike other forms of rights (e.g. politi-
       cal), human rights seem to be of a special kind. They are a strong ideological tool
       of depoliticization and pacification in the hands of the state, in its effort to present
       any radical alternative (including anarchism) as obsolete.
         The Anarchist Before the Law is a magnificent book that will makes us think
       carefully about the relationship between anarchism and law. Anarchists both from
       within and outside academia should read and reread it as it will assist them to
       rethink their tactics and engagement with the law. Likewise, legal theorists will
       see their discipline from a unique perspective. Whilst I remain a pessimist as to

[PAGE 4]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       The anarchist before the law: law without authority 849
                                                             
       whether the law can be salvaged in an emancipatory, radical project, I welcome
       the challenge from the authors. So, ‘let as [or, at least try to] think of law, then, as
       a practice of freedom’ (p. 226).                      
                                                             
                                                             
       Reference                                             
                                                             
       Loizidou, E. (2002) Anarchism: An art of living without law. Routledge.
                                                             
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             