[PAGE 1]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Contemporary Political Theory (2025) 24:862–864       
       https://doi.org/10.1057/s41296-025-00757-w            
       REVIEW                                                
                                                             
       Equality: what it means and why it matters            
                                                             
       Thomas Piketty and Michael Sandel: London, Polity Press, 2025,
       128pp, ISBN: 978-1-509-56550-4                        
                                                             
       Matthew McManus1                                      
                                                             
       Published online: 3 April 2025                        
       © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 2025
                                                             
                                                             
       The story once was that America is essentially a classless society. Or at least a soci-
       ety committed to insisting on its own classlessness. Very few would suggest that
       now even if few powerful people seem interested in doing much about it. The 2024
       Presidential election farcically saw the Democrats railing against semi-fascist oligar-
       chic takeover while taking millions and marching orders from their (good) billion-
       aire donors, while the Republicans sneered at liberal elites through rallying around
       their own mega-billionaire leaders. True to form, the populist Trump 2.0 administra-
       tion looks to be more stacked with the mega wealthy than any other in the country’s
       history (Charalambous & Soo, 2024). Anti-establishment swipes like tax breaks for
       the very wealthy and cuts to social spending aimed at America and the world’s poor-
       est are expected to follow.                           
         These dark trends provide the backdrop for an engaging, if tantalizing, dialogue
       between Thomas Piketty and Michael Sandel, published as Equality: What It Means
       and Why It Matters. Piketty burst onto the intellectual scene in 2014 with his block-
       buster volume Capital in the Twenty First Century, which became one of the most
       popular books to wind up unread on many a millennial’s bookshelf (Piketty, 2014).
       Since his breakout, Piketty has continued to write voluminously, following the John
       Stuart Mill trend of each book becoming more socialist than the last (Piketty, 2021).
         Sandel is a well-known academic at Harvard University. After making his name
       in the 1980s with quite technical communitarian critiques of liberal egalitarian phi-
       losophy, Sandel has since become a notable popularizer. His ‘Justice’ lectures on
       YouTube have racked up tens of millions of views (Sandel, 2020). More recently
       Sandel published a Sage book on why meritocratic mythologies were damaging
       American democracy by calcifying a ruling class of winners who felt they owed
       nothing to anyone and a working class told it had no one to blame but itself for
       its own marginalization. In proper Trumpese, they were the losers and were exactly
       where they deserved to be (Charalambous, 2024).       
       *                                                     
         Matthew McManus                                     
         mattmcm@umich.edu                                   
       1 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA    
        Vol:.(1234567890)                                    

[PAGE 2]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Equality: what it means and why it matters   863      
                                                             
         A crossover between Piketty and Sandel, accomplished scholars and left popular-
       izers both, is something any progressive should look forward to. And by and large
       the dialogue, based on a conversation between the two at the Paris School of Eco-
       nomics in May 2024, does not disappoint. For a short volume (only 119 pages in
       large font, organized by topic), it ranges broadly. It is very much organized as a dia-
       logue, each named speaker making their points in turn, while trying hard to go a
       deep as possible in a relatively short space.         
         From a critical standpoint, both Piketty and Sandel agree that inequality is a prob-
       lem. Three reasons are presented as primary: access to basic goods for everyone,
       the importance of political equality (voice, power, participation), and dignity (p. 4).
       Backing up, these moral arguments are empirical claims about the negative impacts
       of growing inequality. Piketty discusses the enormous sums of money poured into
       privatized American healthcare, paying towards 18% to 20% of GDP in return for
       ‘very, very bad outcomes’ compared to public systems in Europe (p. 21). The exam-
       ples given by Sandel, a political philosopher rather than social scientist, naturally
       tend to be more general. But they are provocative: Sandel stresses how widening
       inequality has meant that the wealthy and poor ‘increasingly live separate lives’.
       They send their children to different schools, work and shop in different places, mix
       in fewer and fewer shared public spaces, and do not even sit together at baseball
       games enjoying the same bad hotdogs anymore. This stratification has ‘corrosive
       effects’ in undermining the bases of solidarity, ‘dignity and mutual recognition’ (p.
       78).                                                  
         As the old question went: what is to be done then? How do we move from ine-
       quality to the titular equality? Piketty’s views on this points are considerably more
       developed and granular than Sandel’s. At times, it feels likes he is pushing Sandel
       to endorse some variant of his own democratic socialism (Piketty, 2021). This can
       come across as a bit pugnacious, though it is worth noting Sandel’s wariness about
       aligning himself explicitly with a social democratic or socialist project can also feel
       like a preference for living in the realm of ideal theory, especially since there is now
       a small but burgeoning democratic socialist movement in the United States. But both
       Piketty and Sandel converge on the need for a far more heavily progressive taxation
       system, pushing for an end to corporate tax havens and global agreement on mini-
       mal corporate tax rates, cutting carbon emissions, and democratizing the political
       system.                                               
         One point of mild tension is on issues of national identity and immigration. San-
       del argues it’s a ‘mistake’ for the left ‘to cede patriotism to the right…social demo-
       cratic and progressive parties should articulate their own conception of what pat-
       riotism and belonging mean’(pp. 101, 102). Piketty does not dismiss this concern,
       but largely tends to economize it by chalking up the rise of national populism to a
       failure to take deprivation and inequality seriously. 
         Here, I tend to sympathize with Sandel. Patriotism can undoubtedly readily bleed
       into xenophobia and ethnocentrism. But the human desire for collective identity and
       belonging is real and cannot be reduced to economic variables. A task for the left
       today is reconceiving patriotism along solidaristic and inclusive lines by aligning
       it with higher moral aspirations than the populist hard right, which operationalizes
       ideals of nation and belonging while denying them any solidaristic implications. Its

[PAGE 3]
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       864                                      M. McManus   
                                                             
       exclusivist collectivism with regard to the foreign ‘other’ is matched only by a vig-
       orous individualism with regard to the domestic ‘foreigners’ outside the gated com-
       munities of GOP elites.                               
         Equality: What is Means and Why It Matters is a swell, but hardly earth-shattering
       book. Nor is it intended to be. Instead it is a model for the kind of dialogues which
       we should be having on the left. My major criticism is that while social democracy,
       patriotism, democratic socialism, and populism all get some attention, very little is
       said about liberalism, whether American or French republican. The closest we get is
       a brief discussion of John Rawls’ Theory of Justice, where Piketty and Sandel unite
       in being critical of the lack of radical potential in Rawlsian philosophy (though San-
       del is a bit more sympathetic). But in fact, Rawls acknowledged near the end of his
       career that even welfare-state capitalism was insufficient to realize liberal principles
       of justice: only property owning democracy or ‘liberal socialism’ would do (Rawls,
       2001, pp. 138, 139).                                  
         This suggests there are untapped theoretical resources for pushing liberalism and
       liberals towards a left project which would take more seriously demands for liberty
       and equality and solidarity. For myself, I have suggested a form of liberal socialism
       inspired by Mill, Rawls, Bobbio, and others, which takes more seriously the require-
       ments of deep solidarity (McManus, 2025). But other, more egalitarian and emanci-
       patory liberalisms might also be possible to enact a much needed rejuvenation and
       realignment. Such a realignment will be necessary to combat right populism and
       inequality, as liberalism remains the dominant alternative ideology to Trumpy poli-
       tics. And it will have the added benefit of requiring liberals to finally show more
       loyalty to their core principles than to unbridled capitalism.
       Data availability Not applicable.                     
                                                             
                                                             
       References                                            
                                                             
       Charalambous, P.R. and Soo, L.K. (2024) Trump has tapped an unprecedented 13 billionaires for his
         administration. ABC News.                           
       McManus, M. (2025) The political theory of liberal socialism. Routledge.
       Piketty, T. (2014) Capital in the twenty-first century. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
       Piketty, T. (2021) Time for socialism: Dispatches from a world on fire, 2016–2021. Yale University Press.
       Rawls, J. (2001) Justice as fairness: A restatement. Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
       Sandel, M. (2009) Justice: What’s the right thing to do?: Episode one-the moral side of murder. Harvard
         University.                                         
       Sandel, M. (2020) The tyranny of merit: What’s become of the common good? Farrar Straus and Giroux.
       Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
       and institutional affiliations.                       
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             